And it came about on one of those days, when he was teaching the people in the Temple and preaching the good news,
That the chief priests and the scribes and the rulers of the people came to him and said, Make clear to us by what authority you do these things and who gave you this authority.
And in answer he said to them, I will put a question to you, and do you give me an answer:
The baptism of John, was it from heaven or of men?
And they said among themselves, If we say, From heaven; he will say, Why did you not have faith in him?
But if we say, Of men; we will be stoned by the people, for they are certain that John was a prophet.
And they made answer that they had no idea where it came from.
And Jesus said, And I will not make clear to you by what authority I do these things.
And he gave the people this story: A man made a vine-garden and gave the use of it to some field-workers and went into another country for a long time.
And at the right time he sent a servant to the workers to get part of the fruit from the vines; but the workmen gave him blows and sent him away with nothing.
And he sent another servant, and they gave blows to him in the same way, and put shame on him, and sent him away with nothing.
And he sent a third, and they gave him wounds and put him out.
And the lord of the garden said, What am I to do? I will send my dearly loved son; they may give respect to him.
But when the workmen saw him, they said to one another, This is he who will one day be the owner of the property: let us put him to death and the heritage will be ours.
And driving him out of the garden they put him to death. Now what will the lord do to these workmen?
He will come and put them to destruction and give the garden to others. And when he said this, they said, May it not be so.
But he, looking on them, said, Is it not in the Writings, The stone which the builders put on one side, the same has become the chief stone of the building?
Everyone falling on that stone will be broken, but the man on whom the stone comes down will be crushed to dust.
And the chief priests and the scribes made attempts to get their hands on him in that very hour; and they were in fear of the people, for they saw that he had made up this story against them.
And they kept watch on him, and sent out secret representatives, who were acting the part of good men, in order that they might get something from his words, on account of which they might give him up to the government and into the power of the ruler.
And they put a question to him, saying, Master, we are certain that your teaching and your words are right, and that you have no respect for a man's position, but you are teaching the true way of God:
Is it right for us to make payment of taxes to Caesar or not?
But he saw through their trick and said to them,
Let me see a penny. Whose image and name are on it? And they said, Caesar's.
And he said, Then give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are God's.
And they were not able to get anything from these words before the people: but they were full of wonder at his answer, and said nothing.
And some of the Sadducees came to him, who say that there is no coming back from the dead; and they said to him,
Master, Moses said that if a man's brother comes to his end, having a wife, but no children, his brother is to take the wife, and get a family for his brother.
Now there were seven brothers, and the first had a wife and came to his end, having no children;
And the second;
And the third took her; and in the same way, all the seven, without having any children, came to their end.
And last of all, the woman came to her end.
When they come back from the dead, whose wife will she be? for all the seven had her.
And Jesus said to them, The sons of this world are married and have wives;
But those to whom is given the reward of the world to come, and to come back from the dead, have no wives, and are not married;
And death has no more power over them, for they are equal to the angels, and are sons of God, being of those who will come back from the dead.
But even Moses made it clear that the dead come back to life, saying, in the story of the burning thorn-tree, The Lord, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
Now he is not the God of the dead but of the living: for all men are living to him.
And some of the scribes, in answer to this, said, Master, you have said well.
And they had fear of putting any more questions to him.
And he said to them, Why do they say that the Christ is the son of David?
For David himself says in the book of Psalms, The Lord said to my Lord, Take your seat at my right hand,
Till I put under your feet all those who are against you.
David then gives him the name of Lord, so how is it possible for him to be his son?
And in the hearing of all the people he said to his disciples,
Keep away from the scribes, whose pleasure it is to go about in long robes, and to have words of respect said to them in the market-places, and to take the chief seats in the Synagogues and the first places at feasts;
Who take the property of widows and before the eyes of men make long prayers; they will get a greater punishment.
And looking up, he saw the men of wealth putting their offerings in the money-box.
And he saw a certain poor widow putting in a farthing.
And he said, Truly I say to you, This poor widow has given more than all of them:
For they gave out of their wealth, having more than enough for themselves: but she, even out of her need, has put in all her living.
And some were talking about the Temple, how it was made fair with beautiful stones and with offerings, but he said,
As for these things which you see, the days will come when not one stone will be resting on another, but all will be broken down.
And they said to him, Master, when will these things be? and what sign will there be when these events are to take place?
And he said, Take care that you are not tricked: for a number of people will come in my name, saying, I am he; and, The time is near: do not go after them.
And when news of wars and troubled times comes to your ears, have no fear; for these things have to be, but the end will not be now.
Then he said to them, Nation will be moved against nation and kingdom against kingdom:
There will be great earth-shocks and outbursts of disease in a number of places, and men will be without food; and there will be wonders and great signs from heaven.
But before all this, they will take you and be very cruel to you, giving you up to the Synagogues and to prisons, taking you before kings and rulers, because of my name.
And it will be turned to a witness for you.
So take care not to be troubled before the time comes, about what answers you will give:
For I will give you words and wisdom, so that not one of those who are against you will be able to get the better of you, or to put you in the wrong.
But you will be given up even by your fathers and mothers, your brothers and relations and friends; and some of you will be put to death.
And you will be hated by all men, because of me.
But not a hair of your head will come to destruction.
By going through all these things, you will keep your lives.
But when you see armies all round about Jerusalem, then be certain that her destruction is near.
Then let those who are in Judaea go in flight to the mountains; and those who are in the middle of the town go out; and let not those who are in the country come in.
For these are the days of punishment, in which all the things in the Writings will be put into effect.
It will be hard for women who are with child, and for her with a baby at the breast, in those days. For great trouble will come on the land, and wrath on this people.
And they will be put to death with the sword, and will be taken as prisoners into all the nations; and Jerusalem will be crushed under the feet of the Gentiles, till the times of the Gentiles are complete.
And there will be signs in the sun and moon and stars; and on the earth, fear among the nations and doubt because of the loud noise of the sea and the waves;
Men's strength will go from them in fear and in waiting for the things which are coming on the earth; for the powers of the heavens will be moved.
And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud, with power and great glory.
But when these things come about, let your heads be lifted up, because your salvation is near.
And he made a story for them: See the fig-tree, and all the trees;
When they put out their young leaves, you take note of it, and it is clear to you that summer is coming.
In the same way, when you see these things taking place you may be certain that the kingdom of God is near.
Truly I say to you, This generation will not come to an end till all things are complete.
Heaven and earth will come to an end, but my words will not come to an end.
But give attention to yourselves, for fear that your hearts become over-full of the pleasures of food and wine, and the cares of this life, and that day may come on you suddenly, and take you as in a net:
For so it will come on all those who are living on the face of all the earth.
But keep watch at all times with prayer, that you may be strong enough to come through all these things and take your place before the Son of man.
And every day he was teaching in the Temple and every night he went out to the mountain which is named the Mountain of Olives to take his rest.
And all the people came early in the morning to give ear to his words in the Temple.
Now the feast of unleavened bread was near, which is called the Passover.
And the chief priests and the scribes were looking for a chance to put him to death, but they went in fear of the people.
And Satan came into Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve.
And he went away and had a discussion with the chief priests and the rulers, about how he might give him up to them.
And they were glad, and undertook to give him money.
And he made an agreement with them to give him up to them, if he got a chance, when the people were not present.
And the day of unleavened bread came, when the Passover lamb is put to death.
And Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, Go and make the Passover ready for us, so that we may take it.
And they said to him, Where are we to get it ready?
And he said to them, When you go into the town you will see a man coming to you with a vessel of water; go after him into the house into which he goes.
And say to the master of the house, The Master says, Where is the guest-room, where I may take the Passover with my disciples?
And he will take you up to a great room with a table and seats: there make ready.
And they went, and it was as he had said: and they made the Passover ready.
And when the time had come, he took his seat, and the Apostles with him.
And he said, I have had a great desire to keep this Passover with you before I come to my death;
For I say to you, I will not take it till it is made complete in the kingdom of God.
And he took a cup and, having given praise, he said, Make division of this among yourselves;
For I say to you, I will not take of the fruit of the vine till the kingdom of God has come.
And he took bread and, having given praise, he gave it to them when it had been broken, saying, This is my body, which is given for you: do this in memory of me.
And in the same way, after the meal, he took the cup, saying, This cup is the new testament, made with my blood which is given for you.
But the hand of him who is false to me is with me at the table.
For it will be done to the Son of man after the purpose of God, but unhappy is that man by whom he is given up.
And they were wondering among themselves which of them it was who would do this thing.
And there was an argument among them about which of them was the greatest.
And he said, The kings of the Gentiles are lords over them, and those who have authority are given names of honour.
But let it not be so with you; but he who is greater, let him become like the younger; and he who is chief, like a servant.
For which is greater, the guest who is seated at a meal or the servant who is waiting on him? is it not the guest? but I am among you as a servant.
But you are those who have kept with me through my troubles;
And I will give you a kingdom as my Father has given one to me,
So that you may take food and drink at my table in my kingdom, and be seated like kings, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Simon, Simon, Satan has made a request to have you, so that he may put you to the test as grain is tested:
But I have made prayer for you, that your faith may not go from you: and when you are turned again, make your brothers strong.
And he said to him, Lord, I am ready to go with you to prison and to death.
And he said, I say to you, Peter, before the cock's second cry today, you will say three times that you have no knowledge of me.
And he said to them, When I sent you out without money or bag or shoes, were you in need of anything? And they said, Nothing.
And he said to them, But now, he who has a money-bag, or a bag for food, let him take it: and he who has not, let him give his coat for money and get a sword.
For I say to you that these words will be put into effect in me, And he was numbered among the evil-doers: for what has been said in the Writings about me has an end.
And they said, Lord, here are two swords. And he said, It is enough.
And he came out, and went, as his way was, to the Mountain of Olives, and the disciples went with him.
And when he came to the place, he said to them, Make a prayer that you may not be put to the test.
And he went a little distance away from them and, falling on his knees in prayer, he said,
Father, if it is your pleasure, take this cup from me: but still, let your pleasure, not mine, be done.
And an angel from heaven came to him, to give him strength.
And being in great trouble of soul, the force of his prayer became stronger, and great drops, like blood, came from him, falling to the earth.
And, getting up from prayer, he came to the disciples, and saw that they were sleeping for sorrow.
And he said, Why are you sleeping? Get up, and give yourselves to prayer, so that you may not be put to the test.
And while he was saying these words, there came a band of people, and Judas, one of the twelve, was in front of them, and he came near to Jesus to give him a kiss.
But Jesus said to him, Judas, will you be false to the Son of man with a kiss?
And when those who were with him saw what was coming, they said, Lord, may we not make use of our swords?
And one of them gave a blow to the servant of the high priest, cutting off his right ear.
But Jesus, answering, said, Put up with this, at least. And touching his ear, he made it well.
And Jesus said to the chief priests and the captains of the Temple and the rulers, who had come against him, Have you come out as against a thief, with swords and sticks?
When I was in the Temple with you every day, your hands were not stretched out against me: but this is your hour, and the authority of the dark power.
And they made him a prisoner and took him away to the house of the high priest. But Peter went after them at a distance.
And a fire was lighted in the middle of the open square, and they were seated together, and Peter was among them.
And a certain woman-servant, seeing him in the light of the fire, and looking at him with attention, said, This man was with him.
But he said, Woman, it is not true; I have no knowledge of him.
And after a little time, another saw him and said, You are one of them; and he said, Man, I am not.
And after about an hour, another man said, with decision, Certainly this man was with him, for he is a Galilaean.
And Peter said, Man, I have no knowledge of these things of which you are talking. And straight away, while he was saying these words, there came the cry of a cock.
And the Lord, turning, gave Peter a look. And the words of the Lord came to Peter's mind, how he had said, This night, before the hour of the cock's cry, you will be false to me three times.
And he went out, weeping bitterly.
And the men in whose hands Jesus was, made sport of him and gave him blows.
And, covering his eyes, they said to him, Are you prophet enough to say who gave you that blow?
And they said a number of other evil things against him.
And when it was day, the rulers of the people came together, with the chief priests and the scribes, and they took him before their Sanhedrin, saying,
If you are the Christ, say so. But he said, If I say so you will not have belief;
And if I put a question to you, you will not give an answer.
But in the future the Son of man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God.
And they all said, Are you then the Son of God? and he said, You say that I am.
And they said, What more need have we of witness? we have the very words of his mouth.
And they all went and took him before Pilate.
And they made statements against him, saying, This man has to our knowledge been teaching our nation to do wrong, and not to make payment of taxes to Caesar, even saying that he himself is Christ, a king.
And Pilate said to him, Are you the King of the Jews? And he said in answer, You say so.
And Pilate said to the chief priests and the people, In my opinion this man has done no wrong.
But they became more violent than before, saying, He has made trouble among the people, teaching through all Judaea from Galilee to this place.
But at these words Pilate said, Is the man a Galilaean?
And when he saw that he was under the authority of Herod, he sent him to Herod, who was in Jerusalem himself at that time.
Now when Herod saw Jesus he was very glad, having for a long time had a desire to see him, for he had had accounts of him, and was hoping to see some wonders done by him.
And he put a great number of questions to him, but he said nothing.
And the chief priests and the scribes were there, making statements against him violently.
And Herod, with the men of his army, put shame on him and made sport of him, and dressing him in shining robes, he sent him back to Pilate.
And that day Herod and Pilate became friends with one another, for before they had been against one another.
And Pilate sent for the chief priests and the rulers and the people, and said to them,
You say that this man has been teaching the people evil things: now I, after going into the question before you, see nothing wrong in this man in connection with the things which you have said against him:
And Herod is of the same opinion, for he has sent him back to us; for, you see, he has done nothing for which I might put him to death.
And so I will give him punishment and let him go.
[]
But with loud voices they said all together, Put this man to death, and make Barabbas free.
Now this man was in prison because of an attack against the government in the town, in which there had been loss of life.
And Pilate again said to them that it was his desire to let Jesus go free.
But crying out they said, To the cross with him!
And he said to them a third time, Why, what evil has he done? I see no reason for putting him to death: I will give him punishment and let him go.
But they went on crying out loudly, Let him be put to death on the cross. And they had their way.
And Pilate gave his decision for their desire to be put into effect.
And in answer to their request, he let that man go free who had been in prison for acting against the government and causing death, and Jesus he gave up to their pleasure.
And while they were taking him away, they put their hands on Simon of Cyrene, who was coming from the country, and made him take the cross after Jesus.
And a great band of people went after him, and of women making signs of grief and weeping for him.
But Jesus, turning to them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, let not your weeping be for me, but for yourselves and for your children.
For the days are coming in which they will say, Happy are those who have had no children, whose bodies have never given birth, whose breasts have never given milk.
And they will say to the mountains, Come down on us, and to the hills, Be a cover over us.
For if they do these things when the tree is green, what will they do when it is dry?
And two others, evil-doers, were taken with him to be put to death.
And when they came to the place which is named Golgotha, they put him on the cross, and the evil-doers, one on the right side, and the other on the left.
And Jesus said, Father, let them have forgiveness, for they have no knowledge of what they are doing. And they made division of his clothing among them by the decision of chance.
And the people were looking on. And the rulers made sport of him, saying, He was a saviour of others; let him do something for himself, if he is the Christ, the man of God's selection.
And the men of the army made sport of him, coming to him and giving him bitter wine,
And saying, If you are the King of the Jews, get yourself free.
And these words were put in writing over him, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
And one of the evil-doers on the cross, with bitter feeling, said to him, Are you not the Christ? Get yourself and us out of this.
But the other, protesting, said, Have you no fear of God? for you have a part in the same punishment,
And with reason; for we have the right reward of our acts, but this man has done nothing wrong.
And he said, Jesus, keep me in mind when you come in your kingdom.
And he said to him, Truly I say to you, Today you will be with me in Paradise.
And it was now about the sixth hour; and all the land was dark till the ninth hour;
The light of the sun went out, and the curtain in the Temple was parted in two.
And Jesus gave a loud cry and said, Father, into your hands I give my spirit: and when he had said this, he gave up his spirit.
And when the captain saw what was done, he gave praise to God, saying, Without doubt this was an upright man.
And all the people who had come together to see it, when they saw the things which were done, went back again making signs of grief.
And all his friends and the women who came with him from Galilee, were waiting at a distance, watching these things.
Now there was a man named Joseph, a man of authority and a good and upright man
(He had not given his approval to their decision or their acts), of Arimathaea, a town of the Jews, who was waiting for the kingdom of God:
This man went to Pilate and made a request for the body of Jesus.
And he took it down, and folding it in a linen cloth, he put it in a place cut in the rock for a dead body; and no one had ever been put in it.
Now it was the day of making ready and the Sabbath was coming on.
And the women who had come with him from Galilee went after him and saw the place and how his body had been put to rest;
And they went back and got ready spices and perfumes; and on the Sabbath they took their rest, in agreement with the law.
But on the first day of the week, at dawn, they came to the place where his body had been put, taking the spices which they had got ready.
And they saw that the stone had been rolled away.
And they went in, but the body of the Lord Jesus was not there.
And while they were in doubt about it, they saw two men in shining clothing by them:
And while their faces were bent down to the earth in fear, these said to them, Why are you looking for the living among the dead?
He is not here, he has come back to life: have in mind what he said to you when he was still in Galilee, saying,
The Son of man will be given up into the hands of evil-doers, and be put to death on the cross, and on the third day he will come back to life.
And his words came back into their minds,
And they went away from that place and gave an account of all these things to the eleven disciples and all the others.
Now they were Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary, the mother of James: and the other women with them said these things to the Apostles.
But these words seemed foolish to them, and they had no belief in them.
But Peter got up and went to the place where the body had been put, and looking in he saw nothing but the linen cloths, and he went to his house full of wonder at what had taken place.
And then, two of them, on that very day, were going to a little town named Emmaus, which was about seven miles from Jerusalem.
And they were talking together about all those things which had taken place.
And while they were talking and questioning together, Jesus himself came near and went with them.
But their eyes were not open that they might have knowledge of him.
And he said to them, What are you talking about together while you go?
Then stopping, and looking sadly at him, one of them, named Cleopas, said to him, Are you the only man living in Jerusalem who has not had news of the things which have taken place there at this time?
And he said to them, What things? And they said, The things to do with Jesus of Nazareth, who was a prophet, great in his acts and his words, before God and all the people:
And how the chief priests and our rulers gave him up to be put to death on the cross.
But we were hoping that he would be the Saviour of Israel. In addition to all this he has now let three days go by from the time when these things took place;
And certain women among us gave us cause for wonder, for they went early to the place where his body had been put,
And it was not there; then they came saying that they had seen a vision of angels who said that he was living.
And some of those who were with us went to the place, and saw that it was as the women had said, but him they did not see.
And he said, O foolish men! how slow you are to give belief to what the prophets have said.
Was it not necessary for the Christ to go through these things, and to come into his glory?
And he made clear to them all the things in the Writings, from Moses and from all the prophets, which had to do with himself.
And they came near the town to which they were going, and he seemed as if he was going on;
But they kept him back, saying, Do not go, for evening is near, the day is almost gone. And he went in with them.
And when he was seated with them at table, he took the bread, and said words of blessing and, making division of it, he gave it to them.
And then their eyes were open, and they had knowledge of him, but he went from their view.
And they said to one another, Were not our hearts burning in us while he was talking to us on the way, making clear to us the holy Writings?
And that very hour they got up and went back to Jerusalem, where the eleven and the others had come together.
And they said to them, The Lord has truly come back to life again, and Simon has seen him.
And they gave an account of the things which had taken place on the way, and how, when he gave them bread, they had knowledge of him.
And while they were saying these things, he himself was among them, and said to them, Peace be with you!
But they were full of fear, being of the opinion that they were seeing a spirit.
And he said to them, Why are you troubled, and why are your hearts full of doubt?
See; my hands and my feet: it is I myself; put your hands on me and make certain; for a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see that I have.
And when he had said this, he let them see his hands and his feet.
And because, for joy and wonder, they were still in doubt, he said to them, Have you any food here?
And they gave him a bit of cooked fish.
And before their eyes he took a meal.
And he said to them, These are the words which I said to you when I was still with you, how it was necessary for all the things which are in the writings of Moses and the prophets and in the Psalms about me, to be put into effect.
Then he made the holy Writings clear to their minds.
And he said to them, So it is in the Writings that the Christ would undergo death, and come back to life again on the third day;
And that teaching about a change of heart and forgiveness of sins is to be given to Jerusalem first and to all nations in his name.
You are witnesses of these things.
And now I will send to you what my father has undertaken to give you, but do not go from the town, till the power from heaven comes to you.
And he took them out till they were near Bethany, and lifting up his hands, he gave them a blessing.
And while he was doing so, he went from them and was taken up into heaven.
And they gave him worship and went back to Jerusalem with great joy.
And they were in the Temple at all times, giving praise to God.
From the first he was the Word, and the Word was in relation with God and was God.
This Word was from the first in relation with God.
All things came into existence through him, and without him nothing was.
What came into existence in him was life, and the life was the light of men.
And the light goes on shining in the dark; it is not overcome by the dark.
There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.
He came for witness, to give witness about the light, so that all men might have faith through him.
He himself was not the light: he was sent to give witness about the light.
The true light, which gives light to every man, was then coming into the world.
He was in the world, the world which came into being through him, but the world had no knowledge of him.
He came to the things which were his and his people did not take him to their hearts.
To all those who did so take him, however, he gave the right of becoming children of God — that is, to those who had faith in his name:
Whose birth was from God and not from blood, or from an impulse of the flesh and man's desire.
And so the Word became flesh and took a place among us for a time; and we saw his glory — such glory as is given to an only son by his father — saw it to be true and full of grace.
John gave witness about him, crying, This is he of whom I said, He who is coming after me is put over me because he was in existence before me.
From his full measure we have all been given grace on grace.
For the law was given through Moses; grace and the true way of life are ours through Jesus Christ.
No man has seen God at any time; the only Son, who is on the breast of the Father, he has made clear what God is.
And this is the witness of John when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to him with the question, Who are you?
He said quite openly and straightforwardly, I am not the Christ.
And they said to him, What then? Are you Elijah? And he said, I am not. Are you the prophet? And his answer was, I am not.
So they said to him, Who are you then? We have to give some answer to those who sent us. What have you to say about yourself?
He said, I am the voice of one crying in the waste land, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the prophet.
Those who had been sent came from the Pharisees.
And they put this question to him, saying, Why then are you giving baptism if you are not the Christ, or Elijah, or the prophet?
John's answer was: I give baptism with water; but there is one among you of whom you have no knowledge;
It is he who is coming after me; I am not good enough to undo his shoes.
These things took place at Bethany on the other side of the Jordan, where John was giving baptism.
The day after, John sees Jesus coming to him and says, See, here is the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!
This is he of whom I said, One is coming after me who is put over me because he was in existence before me.
I myself had no knowledge of him, but I came giving baptism with water so that he might be seen openly by Israel.
And John gave this witness, saying, I saw the Spirit coming down from heaven like a dove and resting on him.
I had no knowledge who he was, but he who sent me to give baptism with water said to me, The one on whom you see the Spirit coming down and resting, it is he who gives baptism with the Holy Spirit.
This I saw myself and my witness is that he is the Son of God.
The day after, John was there again with two of his disciples;
And looking at Jesus while he was walking he said, See, there is the Lamb of God!
Hearing what he said, the two disciples went after Jesus.
And Jesus, turning round, saw them coming after him and said to them, What are you looking for? They said to him, Rabbi (which is to say, Master), where are you living?
He said to them, Come and see. They went with him then and saw where he was living; and they were with him all that day: it was then about the tenth hour of the day.
Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, was one of the two men who, hearing what John said, went after Jesus.
Early in the morning he came across his brother and said to him, We have made discovery! It is the Messiah! (which is to say, the Christ).
And he took him to Jesus. Looking at him fixedly Jesus said, You are Simon, the son of John; your name will be Cephas (which is to say, Peter).
The day after this, Jesus had a desire to go into Galilee. He came across Philip and said to him, Come and be my disciple.
Now Philip's town was Beth-saida, where Andrew and Peter came from.
Philip came across Nathanael and said to him, We have made a discovery! It is he of whom Moses, in the law, and the prophets were writing, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.
Nazareth! said Nathanael, Is it possible for any good to come out of Nazareth? Philip said to him, Come and see.
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him and said of him, See, here is a true son of Israel in whom there is nothing false.
Nathanael said to him, Where did you get knowledge of me? In answer Jesus said, Before Philip was talking with you, while you were still under the fig-tree, I saw you.
Nathanael said to him, Rabbi, you are the Son of God, you are King of Israel!
In answer Jesus said to him, You have faith because I said to you, I saw you under the fig-tree. You will see greater things than these.
And he said to him, Truly I say to you all, You will see heaven opening and God's angels going up and coming down on the Son of man.
On the third day two people were going to be married at Cana in Galilee. The mother of Jesus was there:
And Jesus with his disciples came as guests.
When they had not enough wine, the mother of Jesus said to him, They have no wine.
Jesus said to her, Woman, this is not your business; my time is still to come.
His mother said to the servants, Whatever he says to you, do it.
Now six pots of stone, every one taking two or three firkins of water, were placed there for the purpose of washing, as is the way of the Jews.
Jesus said to the servants, Make the pots full of water. And they made them full to the top.
Then he said to them, Now take some, and give it to the master of the feast. So they took it to him.
After tasting the water which had now become wine, the master of the feast (having no idea where it came from, though it was clear to the servants who took the water out) sent for the newly-married man,
And said to him, Every man first puts out his best wine and when all have had enough he puts out what is not so good; but you have kept the good wine till now.
This, the first of his signs, Jesus did at Cana in Galilee and let his glory be seen openly; and his disciples put their faith in him.
After this he went down to Capernaum, with his mother, his brothers, and his disciples, and they were there not more than two or three days.
The time of the Passover of the Jews was near and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
And there in the Temple he saw men trading in oxen and sheep and doves, and he saw the changers of money in their seats:
And he made a whip of small cords and put them all out of the Temple, with the sheep and the oxen, sending in all directions the small money of the changers and overturning their tables;
And to those who were trading in doves he said, Take these things away; do not make my Father's house a market.
And it came to the minds of the disciples that the Writings say, I am on fire with passion for your house.
Then the Jews put this question to him: What sign of authority have you to give us, seeing that you do these things?
And Jesus said to them, Send destruction on this Temple and I will put it up again in three days.
The Jews said, The building of this Temple took forty-six years; and you will put it up in three days!
But his words were about that holy building which was his body.
So when he had come back again from the dead, the memory of these words came back to the disciples, and they had faith in the holy Writings and in the word which Jesus had said.
Now while he was in Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover, a great number of people came to have faith in his name, after seeing the signs which he did.
But Jesus did not have faith in them, because he had knowledge of them all.
He had no need for any witness about man; for he himself had knowledge of what was in man.
Now there was among the Pharisees a man named Nicodemus, who was one of the rulers of the Jews.
He came to Jesus by night and said to him, Rabbi, we are certain that you have come from God as a teacher, because no man would be able to do these signs which you do if God was not with him.
Jesus said to him, Truly, I say to you, Without a new birth no man is able to see the kingdom of God.
Nicodemus said to him, How is it possible for a man to be given birth when he is old? Is he able to go into his mother's body a second time and come to birth again?
Jesus said in answer, Truly, I say to you, If a man's birth is not from water and from the Spirit, it is not possible for him to go into the kingdom of God.
That which has birth from the flesh is flesh, and that which has birth from the Spirit is spirit.
Do not be surprised that I say to you, It is necessary for you to have a second birth.
The wind goes where its pleasure takes it, and the sound of it comes to your ears, but you are unable to say where it comes from and where it goes: so it is with everyone whose birth is from the Spirit.
And Nicodemus said to him, How is it possible for these things to be?
And Jesus, answering, said, Are you the teacher of Israel and have no knowledge of these things?
Truly, I say to you, We say that of which we have knowledge; we give witness of what we have seen; and you do not take our witness to be true.
If you have no belief when my words are about the things of earth, how will you have belief if my words are about the things of heaven?
And no one has ever gone up to heaven but he who came down from heaven, the Son of man.
As the snake was lifted up by Moses in the waste land, even so it is necessary for the Son of man to be lifted up:
So that whoever has faith may have in him eternal life.
For God had such love for the world that he gave his only Son, so that whoever has faith in him may not come to destruction but have eternal life.
God did not send his Son into the world to be judge of the world; he sent him so that the world might have salvation through him.
The man who has faith in him does not come up to be judged; but he who has no faith in him has been judged even now, because he has no faith in the name of the only Son of God.
And this is the test by which men are judged: the light has come into the world and men have more love for the dark than for the light, because their acts are evil.
The light is hated by everyone whose acts are evil and he does not come to the light for fear that his acts will be seen.
But he whose life is true comes to the light, so that it may be clearly seen that his acts have been done by the help of God.
After these things Jesus and his disciples went into the land of Judaea, and there he was with them for some time, giving baptism.
Now John was then giving baptism at Aenon near Salim, because there was much water there; and people came and were given baptism.
For at this time John had not been put into prison.
Then a question came up between John's disciples and a Jew about washing.
And they went to John and said to him, Rabbi, the man who was with you on the other side of the Jordan, the man to whom you gave witness, is now giving baptism, and everyone is going to him.
And this was John's answer: A man is unable to have anything if it is not given to him from heaven.
You yourselves give witness that I said, I am not the Christ. What I said was, I am sent before the Christ.
He who has the bride is the husband: but the husband's friend, whose place is by his side and whose ears are open to him, is full of joy because of the husband's voice: such is my joy, and it is complete.
He has to become greater while I become less.
He who comes from heaven is greater than all others: he who comes from earth is of the earth, and of the earth are his words: he who comes from heaven is over all.
He gives witness of what he has seen and of what has come to his ears; and no man takes his witness as true.
He who so takes his witness has made clear his faith that God is true.
For he whom God has sent says God's words; and God does not give him the Spirit by measure.
The Father has love for the Son and has put all things into his hands.
He who has faith in the Son has eternal life; but he who has not faith in the Son will not see life; God's wrath is resting on him.
Now when it was clear to the Lord that word had come to the ears of the Pharisees that Jesus was making more disciples than John and was giving them baptism
(Though, in fact, it was his disciples who gave baptism, not Jesus himself),
He went out of Judaea into Galilee again.
And it was necessary for him to go through Samaria.
So he came to a town of Samaria which was named Sychar, near to the bit of land which Jacob gave to his son Joseph:
Now Jacob's fountain was there. Jesus, being tired after his journey, was resting by the fountain. It was about the sixth hour.
A woman of Samaria came to get water, and Jesus said to her, Give me some water.
For his disciples had gone to the town to get food.
The woman of Samaria said to him, Why do you, a Jew, make a request for water to me, a woman of Samaria? She said this because Jews have nothing to do with the people of Samaria.
In answer Jesus said, If you had knowledge of what God gives freely and who it is who says to you, Give me water, you would make your prayer to him, and he would give you living water.
The woman said to him, Sir, you have no vessel and the fountain is deep; from where will you get the living water?
Are you greater than our father Jacob who gave us the fountain and took the water of it himself, with his children and his cattle?
Jesus said to her, Everyone who takes this water will be in need of it again:
But whoever takes the water I give him will never be in need of drink again; for the water I give him will become in him a fountain of eternal life.
The woman said to him, Sir, give me this water, so that I may not be in need again of drink and will not have to come all this way for it.
Jesus said to her, Go, get your husband and come back here with him.
In answer, the woman said, I have no husband. Jesus said to her, You have said rightly, I have no husband:
You have had five husbands, and the man you have now is not your husband: that was truly said.
The woman said to him, Sir, I see that you are a prophet.
Our fathers gave worship on this mountain, but you Jews say that the right place for worship is in Jerusalem.
Jesus said to her, Woman, take my word for this; the time is coming when you will not give worship to the Father on this mountain or in Jerusalem.
You give worship, but without knowledge of what you are worshipping: we give worship to what we have knowledge of: for salvation comes from the Jews.
But the time is coming, and is even now here, when the true worshippers will give worship to the Father in the true way of the spirit, for these are the worshippers desired by the Father.
God is Spirit: then let his worshippers give him worship in the true way of the spirit.
The woman said to him, I am certain that the Messiah, who is named Christ, is coming; when he comes he will make all things clear to us.
Jesus said to her, I, who am talking to you, am he.
At that point the disciples came back, and they were surprised to see him talking to a woman; but not one of them said to him, What is your purpose? or, Why are you talking to her?
Then the woman put down her water-pot and went into the town, and said to the people,
Come and see a man who has been talking to me of everything I ever did! Is it possible that this is the Christ?
So they went out of the town and came to him.
While this was taking place, the disciples were saying to Jesus, Master, take some food.
But he said to them, I have food of which you have no knowledge.
So the disciples said one to another, Did anyone give him food?
Jesus said, My food is to do the pleasure of him who sent me and to make his work complete.
You would say, Four months from now is the time of the grain-cutting. Take a look, I say to you, at the fields; they are even now white for cutting.
He who does the cutting now has his reward; he is getting together fruit for eternal life, so that he who did the planting and he who gets in the grain may have joy together.
In this the saying is a true one, One does the planting, and another gets in the grain.
I sent you to get in grain which you had no hand in planting: other men did that work, and you take the reward.
Now a number of the people of that town had faith in him because of the woman's witness: He has been talking to me of everything I ever did.
So when the people came to him they made request to him to be among them for a time, and he was there two days.
And a great number more of them came to have faith in him because of what he himself said.
And they said to the woman, Now we have faith, but not because of your story: we ourselves have given ear to his words, and we are certain that he is truly the Saviour of the world.
And after the two days he went on from there into Galilee.
For Jesus himself said that a prophet has no honour in the country of his birth.
So when he came into Galilee, the Galilaeans took him to their hearts because of the things which they had seen him do in Jerusalem at the feast — they themselves having been there at the feast.
So he came to Cana in Galilee, where he had made the water wine. And there was a certain man of high position whose son was ill at Capernaum.
When it came to his ears that Jesus had come from Judaea into Galilee, he went to him and made a request that he would come down to his son, who was near to death, and make him well.
Then Jesus said to him, You will not have faith if you do not see signs and wonders.
The man said, Sir, come down before my boy is dead.
And Jesus said, Go in peace; your son is living. The man had faith in the word which Jesus said to him and went away.
And while he was going down, his servants came to him and said, Your boy is living.
So he put a question to them as to the hour when he became better; and they said to him, The disease went from him yesterday at the seventh hour.
It was clear then to the father that this was the very time at which Jesus said to him, Your son is living. And he had faith in Jesus, he and all his family.
Now this is the second sign which Jesus did after he had come out of Judaea into Galilee.
After these things there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Now in Jerusalem near the sheep-market there is a public bath which in Hebrew is named Beth-zatha. It has five doorways.
In these doorways there were a great number of people with different diseases: some unable to see, some without the power of walking, some with wasted bodies.
[]
One man was there who had been ill for thirty-eight years.
When Jesus saw him there on the floor it was clear to him that he had been now a long time in that condition, and so he said to the man, Is it your desire to get well?
The ill man said in answer, Sir, I have nobody to put me into the bath when the water is moving; and while I am on the way down some other person gets in before me.
Jesus said to him, Get up, take your bed and go.
And the man became well straight away, and took up his bed and went. Now that day was the Sabbath.
So the Jews said to the man who had been made well, It is the Sabbath; and it is against the law for you to take up your bed.
He said to them, But he who made me well, said to me, Take up your bed and go.
Then they put to him the question: Who is the man who said to you, Take it up and go?
Now he who had been made well had no knowledge who it was, Jesus having gone away because of the number of people who were in that place.
After a time Jesus came across him in the Temple and said to him, See, you are well and strong; do no more sin for fear a worse thing comes to you.
The man went away and said to the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well.
And for this reason the Jews were turned against Jesus, because he was doing these things on the Sabbath.
But his answer was: My Father is still working even now, and so I am working.
For this cause the Jews had an even greater desire to put Jesus to death, because not only did he not keep the Sabbath but he said God was his Father, so making himself equal with God.
So Jesus made answer and said, Truly I say to you, The Son is not able to do anything himself; he is able to do only what he sees the Father doing; whatever the Father does the Son does it in the same way.
For the Father has love for the Son and lets him see everything which he does: and he will let him see greater works than these so that you may be full of wonder.
In the same way, as the Father gives life to the dead, even so the Son gives life to those to whom he is pleased to give it.
The Father is not the judge of men, but he has given all decisions into the hands of the Son;
So that all men may give honour to the Son even as they give honour to the Father. He who gives no honour to the Son gives no honour to the Father who sent him.
Truly I say to you, The man whose ears are open to my word and who has faith in him who sent me, has eternal life; he will not be judged, but has come from death into life.
Truly I say to you, The time is coming, it has even now come, when the voice of the Son of God will come to the ears of the dead, and those hearing it will have life.
For even as the Father has life in himself, so he has given to the Son to have life in himself.
And he has given him authority to be judge because he is the Son of man.
Do not be surprised at this: for the time is coming when his voice will come to all who are in the place of the dead,
And they will come out; those who have done good, into the new life; and those who have done evil, to be judged.
Of myself I am unable to do anything: as the voice comes to me so I give a decision: and my decision is right because I have no desire to do what is pleasing to myself, but only what is pleasing to him who sent me.
If I gave witness about myself, my witness would not be true.
There is another who gives witness about me and I am certain that the witness he gives about me is true.
You sent to John and he gave true witness.
But I have no need of a man's witness: I only say these things so that you may have salvation.
He was a burning and shining light, and for a time you were ready to be happy in his light.
But the witness which I have is greater than that of John: the work which the Father has given me to do, the very work which I am now doing, is a witness that the Father has sent me.
And the Father himself who sent me has given witness about me. Not one of you has ever given ear to his voice; his form you have not seen.
And you have not kept his word in your hearts, because you have not faith in him whom he has sent.
You make search in the holy Writings, in the belief that through them you get eternal life; and it is those Writings which give witness about me.
And still you have no desire to come to me so that you may have life.
I do not take honour from men;
But I have knowledge of you that you have no love for God in your hearts.
I have come in my Father's name, and your hearts are not open to me. If another comes with no other authority but himself, you will give him your approval.
How is it possible for you to have faith while you take honour one from another and have no desire for the honour which comes from the only God?
Put out of your minds the thought that I will say things against you to the Father: the one who says things against you is Moses, on whom you put your hopes.
If you had belief in Moses you would have belief in me; for his writings are about me.
If you have no belief in his writings, how will you have belief in my words?
After these things Jesus went away to the other side of the sea of Galilee — that is, the sea of Tiberias.
And a great number of people went after him because they saw the signs which he did on those who were ill.
Then Jesus went up the mountain and was seated there with his disciples.
Now the Passover, a feast of the Jews, was near.
Lifting up his eyes, Jesus saw a great number of people coming to where he was, and he said to Philip, Where may we get bread for all these people?
This he said, testing him: for he had no doubt what he himself would do.
Philip made answer, Bread to the value of two hundred pence would not be enough even to give everyone a little.
One of his disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, said to Jesus,
There is a boy here with five barley cakes and two fishes: but what is that among such a number?
Jesus said, Let the people be seated. Now there was much grass in that place. And those seated on the grass were about five thousand.
Then Jesus took the cakes and having given praise to God, he gave them to the people who were seated, and the fishes in the same way, as much as they had need of.
And when they had had enough, Jesus said to his disciples, Take up the broken bits which are over, so that nothing may be wasted.
So they took them up: twelve baskets full of broken bits of the five cakes which were over after the people had had enough.
And when the people saw the sign which he had done, they said, Truly, this is the prophet who is to come into the world.
Now when Jesus saw that the people were about to come and take him by force to make him a king, he went away again up the mountain by himself.
When evening came the disciples went down to the sea;
And they took a boat and went across the sea in the direction of Capernaum. By then it was dark and still Jesus had not come to them.
The sea was getting rough because of a strong wind which was blowing.
After they had gone three or four miles they saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near to the boat; and they had great fear.
But he said to them, It is I, have no fear.
Then they readily took him into the boat: and straight away the boat was at the land to which they were going.
The day after, the people who were on the other side of the sea saw that only one small boat had been there, that Jesus had not gone in that boat with the disciples, but that the disciples had gone away by themselves.
Some other boats, however, came from Tiberias near to the place where they had taken the bread after the Lord had given praise.
So when the people saw that Jesus was not there, or his disciples, they got into those boats and went over to Capernaum looking for Jesus.
And when they came across him on the other side of the sea they said, Rabbi, when did you come here?
Jesus, answering them, said, Truly I say to you, You come after me, not because you saw signs, but because you were given the bread and had enough.
Let your work not be for the food which comes to an end, but for the food which goes on for eternal life, which the Son of man will give to you, for on him has God the Father put his mark.
Then they said to him, How may we do the works of God?
Jesus, answering, said to them, This is to do the work of God: to have faith in him whom God has sent.
So they said, What sign do you give us, so that we may see and have faith in you? What do you do?
Our fathers had the manna in the waste land, as the Writings say, He gave them bread from heaven.
Jesus then said to them, Truly I say to you, What Moses gave you was not the bread from heaven; it is my Father who gives you the true bread from heaven.
The bread of God is the bread which comes down out of heaven and gives life to the world.
Ah, Lord, they said, give us that bread for ever!
And this was the answer of Jesus: I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will never be in need of food, and he who has faith in me will never be in need of drink.
But it is as I said to you: you have seen me, and still you have no faith.
Whatever the Father gives to me will come to me; and I will not send away anyone who comes to me.
For I have come down from heaven, not to do my pleasure, but the pleasure of him who sent me.
And this is the pleasure of him who sent me, that I am not to let out of my hands anything which he has given me, but I am to give it new life on the last day.
This, I say, is my Father's pleasure, that everyone who sees the Son and has faith in him may have eternal life: and I will take him up on the last day.
Now the Jews said bitter things about Jesus because of his words, I am the bread which came down from heaven.
And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we have seen? How is it then that he now says, I have come down from heaven?
Jesus made answer and said, Do not say things against me, one to another.
No man is able to come to me if the Father who sent me does not give him the desire to come: and I will take him up from the dead on the last day.
The writings of the prophets say, And they will all have teaching from God. Everyone whose ears have been open to the teaching of the Father comes to me.
Not that anyone has ever seen the Father; only he who is from God, he has seen the Father.
Truly I say to you, He who has faith in me has eternal life.
I am the bread of life.
Your fathers took the manna in the waste land — and they are dead.
The bread which comes from heaven is such bread that a man may take it for food and never see death.
I am the living bread which has come from heaven: if any man takes this bread for food he will have life for ever: and more than this, the bread which I will give is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world.
Then the Jews had an angry discussion among themselves, saying, How is it possible for this man to give us his flesh for food?
Then Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, If you do not take the flesh of the Son of man for food, and if you do not take his blood for drink, you have no life in you.
He who takes my flesh for food and my blood for drink has eternal life: and I will take him up from the dead at the last day.
My flesh is true food and my blood is true drink.
He who takes my flesh for food and my blood for drink is in me and I in him.
As the living Father has sent me, and I have life because of the Father, even so he who takes me for his food will have life because of me.
This is the bread which has come down from heaven. It is not like the food which your fathers had: they took of the manna, and are dead; but he who takes this bread for food will have life for ever.
Jesus said these things in the Synagogue while he was teaching at Capernaum.
Then, hearing this, a number of his disciples said, This is a hard saying; who is able to take in such teaching?
When Jesus became conscious that his disciples were protesting about what he said, he said to them, Does this give you trouble?
What then will you say if you see the Son of man going up to where he was before?
The spirit is the life giver; the flesh is of no value: the words which I have said to you are spirit and they are life.
But still some of you have no faith. For it was clear to Jesus from the first who they were who had no faith, and who it was who would be false to him.
And he said, This is why I said to you, No man is able to come to me if he is not given the power to do so by the Father.
Because of what he said, a number of the disciples went back and would no longer go with him.
So Jesus said to the twelve, Have you a desire to go away?
Then Simon Peter gave this answer: Lord, to whom are we to go? you have the words of eternal life;
And we have faith and are certain that you are the Holy One of God.
Then Jesus said, Did I not make a selection of you, the twelve, and one of you is a son of the Evil One?
He was talking of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. It was he who was to be false to Jesus — one of the twelve.
After this, Jesus went from place to place in Galilee. He did not go about in Judaea, because the Jews were looking for a chance to put him to death.
But the feast of the Jews, the feast of tents, was near.
So his brothers said to him, Go away from here into Judaea so that your disciples may see the works which you do.
Because no man does things secretly if he has a desire that men may have knowledge of him. If you do these things, let yourself be seen by all men.
For even his brothers had no belief in him.
Jesus said to them, My time is still to come, but any time is good for you.
It is not possible for you to be hated by the world; but I am hated by it, because I give witness that what it does is evil.
Go you up to the feast: I am not going up now to the feast because my time has not fully come.
Having said these things to them, he still kept in Galilee.
But after his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he went up, not publicly, but in secret.
At the feast the Jews were looking for him and saying, Where is he?
And there was much discussion about him among the mass of the people. Some said, He is a good man; but others said, No, he is giving people false ideas.
But no man said anything about him openly for fear of the Jews.
Now in the middle of the feast Jesus went up to the Temple and was teaching.
Then the Jews were surprised and said, How has this man got knowledge of books? He has never been to school.
Jesus gave them this answer: It is not my teaching, but his who sent me.
If any man is ready to do God's pleasure he will have knowledge of the teaching and of where it comes from — from God or from myself.
The man whose words come from himself is looking for glory for himself, but he who is looking for the glory of him who sent him — that man is true and there is no evil in him.
Did not Moses give you the law? Even so, not one of you keeps the law. Why have you a desire to put me to death?
The people said in answer, You have an evil spirit: who has any desire to put you to death?
This was the answer of Jesus: I have done one work and you are all surprised at it.
Moses gave you circumcision — not that it comes from Moses, but from the fathers — and even on the Sabbath you give a child circumcision.
If a child is given circumcision on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses may not be broken, why are you angry with me because I made a man completely well on the Sabbath?
Let not your decisions be based on what you see, but on righteousness.
Then some of the people of Jerusalem said, Is not this the man whose death is desired?
And here he is talking openly and they say nothing to him! Is it possible that the rulers have knowledge that this is truly the Christ?
However, it is clear to us where this man comes from: but when the Christ comes no one will have knowledge where he comes from.
Then, when he was teaching in the Temple, Jesus said with a loud voice, You have knowledge of me and you have knowledge of where I come from; and I have not come of myself; but there is One who has sent me; he is true, but you have no knowledge of him.
I have knowledge of him because I came from him and he sent me.
Then they had a desire to take him: but no man put hands on him because his hour was still to come.
And numbers of the people had belief in him, and they said, When the Christ comes will he do more signs than this man has done?
This discussion of the people came to the ears of the Pharisees; and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent servants to take him.
Then Jesus said, I will be with you a little longer and then I go to him who sent me.
You will be looking for me, and you will not see me: and where I am you may not come.
So the Jews said among themselves, To what place is he going where we will not see him? will he go to the Jews living among the Greeks and become the teacher of the Greeks?
What is this saying of his, You will be looking for me and will not see me, and where I am you may not come?
On the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus got up and said in a loud voice, If any man is in need of drink let him come to me and I will give it to him.
He who has faith in me, out of his body, as the Writings have said, will come rivers of living water.
This he said of the Spirit which would be given to those who had faith in him: the Spirit had not been given then, because the glory of Jesus was still to come.
When these words came to their ears, some of the people said, This is certainly the prophet.
Others said, This is the Christ. But others said, Not so; will the Christ come from Galilee?
Do not the Writings say that the Christ comes of the seed of David and from Beth-lehem, the little town where David was?
So there was a division among the people because of him.
And some of them had a desire to take him; but no man put hands on him.
Then the servants went back to the chief priests and Pharisees, who said to them, Why have you not got him with you?
The servants made answer, No man ever said things like this man.
Then the Pharisees said to them, Have you, like the others, been given false ideas?
Have any of the rulers belief in him, or any one of the Pharisees?
But these people who have no knowledge of the law are cursed.
Nicodemus — he who had come to Jesus before, being himself one of them — said to them,
Is a man judged by our law before it has given him a hearing and has knowledge of what he has done?
This was their answer: And do you come from Galilee? Make search and you will see that no prophet comes out of Galilee.
[And every man went to his house;
But Jesus went to the Mountain of Olives.
And early in the morning he came again into the Temple and all the people came to him and he was seated teaching them.
Now the scribes and Pharisees came, with a woman who had been taken in the act of sinning against the married relation;
And putting her forward, they said to him, Master, this woman has been taken in the very act of sinning against the married relation.
Now in the law Moses gave directions that such women were to be stoned; what do you say about it?
They said this, testing him, so that they might have something against him. But Jesus, with his head bent down, made letters on the floor with his finger.
But when they went on with their questions, he got up and said to them, Let him among you who is without sin be the first to send a stone at her.
And again, with bent head, he made letters on the floor.
And when his words came to their ears, they went out one by one, starting with the oldest even to the last, because they were conscious of what was in their hearts: and Jesus was there by himself with the woman before him.
Then Jesus got up, and seeing nobody but the woman, he said to her, Where are the men who said things against you? did no one give a decision against you?
And she said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said, And I do not give a decision against you: go, and never do wrong again.]
Then again Jesus said to them, I am the light of the world; he who comes with me will not be walking in the dark but will have the light of life.
So the Pharisees said to him, The witness you give is about yourself: your witness is not true.
Jesus said in answer, Even if I give witness about myself, my witness is true, because I have knowledge of where I came from and where I am going; but you have no knowledge of where I come from or of where I am going.
You are judging from what you see; I am judging no man.
Even if I am judging, my decision is right, because I am not by myself — with me is the Father who sent me.
Even in your law it is said that the witness of two men is true.
I give witness about myself and the Father who sent me gives witness about me.
Then they said to him, Where is your Father? Jesus said in answer, You have no knowledge of me or of my Father: if you had knowledge of me you would have knowledge of my Father.
Jesus said these words in the place where the offerings were stored, while he was teaching in the Temple: but no man took him because his time was still to come.
Then he said to them again, I am going away and you will be looking for me, but death will overtake you in your sins. It is not possible for you to come where I am going.
So the Jews said, Will he take his life? Is that why he says, Where I go it is not possible for you to come?
And he said to them, You are of the earth; I am from heaven: you are of this world; I am not of this world.
For this reason I said to you that death will overtake you in your sins: for if you have not faith that I am he, death will come to you while you are in your sins.
Then they said to him, Who are you? Jesus said, What I said to you from the first.
I have much to say about you and against you: but he who sent me is true and what he has said to me I say to the world.
They did not see that his words were about the Father.
So Jesus said, When the Son of man has been lifted up by you, then it will be clear to you who I am, and that I do nothing of myself, but say as the Father gave me teaching.
He who sent me is with me; he has not gone from me, because at all times I do the things which are pleasing to him.
When he said this a number came to have faith in him.
Then Jesus said to the Jews who had faith in him, If you keep my word, then you are truly my disciples;
And you will have knowledge of what is true, and that will make you free.
They said to him in answer, We are Abraham's seed and have never been any man's servant: why do you say, You will become free?
And this was the answer Jesus gave them: Truly I say to you, Everyone who does evil is the servant of sin.
Now the servant does not go on living in the house for ever, but the son does.
If then the son makes you free, you will be truly free.
I am conscious that you are Abraham's seed; but you have a desire to put me to death because my word has no place in you.
I say the things which I have seen in my Father's house: and you do the things which come to you from your father's house.
In answer they said to him, Our father is Abraham. Jesus said to them, If you were Abraham's children you would do what Abraham did.
But now you have a desire to put me to death, a man who has said to you what is true, as I had it from God: Abraham did not do that.
You are doing the works of your father. They said to him, We are true sons of Abraham; we have one Father, who is God.
Jesus said to them, If God was your Father you would have love for me, because it was from God I came and am here. I did not come of myself, but he sent me.
Why are my words not clear to you? It is because your ears are shut to my teaching.
You are the children of your father the Evil One and it is your pleasure to do his desires. From the first he was a taker of life; and he did not go in the true way because there is no true thing in him. When he says what is false, it is natural to him, for he is false and the father of what is false.
But because I say what is true, you have no belief in me.
Which of you is able truly to say that I am a sinner? If I say what is true, why have you no belief in me?
He who is a child of God gives ear to the words of God: your ears are not open to them because you are not from God.
The Jews said to him in answer, Are we not right in saying that you are of Samaria and have an evil spirit?
And this was the answer of Jesus: I have not an evil spirit; but I give honour to my Father and you do not give honour to me.
I, however, am not in search of glory for myself: there is One who is searching for it and he is judge.
Truly I say to you, If a man keeps my word he will never see death.
The Jews said to him, Now we are certain that you have an evil spirit. Abraham is dead, and the prophets are dead; and you say, If a man keeps my word he will never see death.
Are you greater than our father Abraham, who is dead? and the prophets are dead: who do you say that you are?
Jesus said in answer, If I take glory for myself, my glory is nothing: it is my Father who gives me glory, of whom you say that he is your God.
You have no knowledge of him, but I have knowledge of him; and if I said I have no knowledge of him I would be talking falsely like you: but I have full knowledge of him, and I keep his word.
Your father Abraham was full of joy at the hope of seeing my day: he saw it and was glad.
Then the Jews said to him, You are not fifty years old; have you seen Abraham?
Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, Before Abraham came into being, I am.
So they took up stones to send at him: but Jesus got secretly out of their way and went out of the Temple.
And when he went on his way, he saw a man blind from birth.
And his disciples put a question to him, saying, Master, was it because of this man's sin, or the sin of his father and mother, that he has been blind from birth?
Jesus said in answer, It was not because of his sin, or because of his father's or mother's; it was so that the works of God might be seen openly in him.
While it is day we have to do the works of him who sent me: the night comes when no work may be done.
As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.
Having said these words, he put earth, mixed with water from his mouth, on the man's eyes,
And said to him, Go and make yourself clean in the bath of Siloam (the sense of the name is, Sent). So he went away and, after washing, came back able to see.
Then the neighbours and others who had seen him before in the street, with his hand out for money, said, Is not this the man who got money from people?
Some said, It is he: others said, No, but he is like him. He said, I am he.
So they said to him, How then were your eyes made open?
His answer was: The man who is named Jesus put earth mixed with water on my eyes, and said to me, Go and make yourself clean in Siloam: so I went away and, after washing, am now able to see.
And they said to him, Where is he? His answer was: I have no knowledge.
They took him before the Pharisees — this man who had been blind.
Now the day on which the earth was mixed by Jesus and the man's eyes were made open was the Sabbath.
So the Pharisees put more questions to him about how his eyes had been made open. And he said to them, He put earth on my eyes, and I had a wash and am able to see.
Then some of the Pharisees said, That man has not come from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath. Others said, How is it possible for a sinner to do such signs? So there was a division among them.
Again they said to the blind man, What have you to say about him for opening your eyes? And he said, He is a prophet.
Now the Jews had no belief in the statement that he had been blind and was now able to see, till they sent for the father and mother of the man whose eyes had been made open,
And put the question to them, saying, Is this your son, of whom you say that he was blind at birth? how is it then that he is now able to see?
In answer his father and mother said, We are certain that this is our son and that he was blind at birth:
But how it is he is now able to see, or who made his eyes open, we are not able to say: put the question to him; he is old enough to give an answer for himself.
They said this because of their fear of the Jews: for the Jews had come to an agreement that if any man said that Jesus was the Christ he would be put out of the Synagogue.
That was the reason why they said, He is old enough; put the question to him.
So they sent a second time for the man who had been blind and they said to him, Give glory to God: it is clear to us that this man is a sinner.
He said in answer, I have no knowledge if he is a sinner or not, but one thing I am certain about; I was blind, and now I see.
Then they said to him, What did he do to you? how did he give you the use of your eyes?
His answer was: I have said it before, but your ears were shut: why would you have me say it again? is it your desire to become his disciples?
And they were angry with him and said, You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses.
We are certain that God gave his word to Moses: but as for this man, we have no knowledge where he comes from.
The man said in answer, Why, here is a strange thing! You have no knowledge where he comes from though he gave me the use of my eyes.
We have knowledge that God does not give ear to sinners, but if any man is a worshipper of God and does his pleasure, to him God's ears are open.
In all the years nobody has ever before seen the eyes of a man blind from birth made open.
If this man did not come from God he would be unable to do anything.
Their answer was: You came to birth through sin; do you make yourself our teacher? And they put him out of the Synagogue.
It came to the ears of Jesus that they had put him out, and meeting him he said, Have you faith in the Son of man?
He said in answer, And who is he, Lord? Say, so that I may have faith in him.
Jesus said to him, You have seen him; it is he who is talking to you.
And he said, Lord, I have faith. And he gave him worship.
And Jesus said, I came into this world to be a judge, so that those who do not see may see, and those who see may become blind.
These words came to the ears of the Pharisees who were with him and they said to him, Are we, then, blind?
Jesus said to them, If you were blind you would have no sin: but now that you say, We see; your sin is there still.
Truly I say to you, He who does not go through the door into the place where the sheep are kept, but gets in by some other way, is a thief and an outlaw.
He who goes in by the door is the keeper of the sheep.
The porter lets him in; and the sheep give ear to his voice; he says over the names of the sheep, and takes them out.
When he has got them all out, he goes before them, and the sheep go after him, for they have knowledge of his voice.
They will not go after another who is not their keeper, but will go from him in flight, because his voice is strange to them.
In this Jesus was teaching them in the form of a story: but what he said was not clear to them.
So Jesus said again, Truly I say to you, I am the door of the sheep.
All who came before me are thieves and outlaws: but the sheep did not give ear to them.
I am the door: if any man goes in through me he will have salvation, and will go in and go out, and will get food.
The thief comes only to take the sheep and to put them to death: he comes for their destruction: I have come so that they may have life and have it in greater measure.
I am the good keeper of sheep: the good keeper gives his life for the sheep.
He who is a servant, and not the keeper or the owner of the sheep, sees the wolf coming and goes in flight, away from the sheep; and the wolf comes down on them and sends them in all directions:
Because he is a servant he has no interest in the sheep.
I am the good keeper; I have knowledge of my sheep, and they have knowledge of me,
Even as the Father has knowledge of me and I of the Father; and I am giving my life for the sheep.
And I have other sheep which are not of this field: I will be their guide in the same way, and they will give ear to my voice, so there will be one flock and one keeper.
For this reason am I loved by the Father, because I give up my life so that I may take it again.
No one takes it away from me; I give it up of myself. I have power to give it up, and I have power to take it again. These orders I have from my Father.
There was a division again among the Jews because of these words.
And a number of them said, He has an evil spirit and is out of his mind; why do you give ear to him?
Others said, These are not the words of one who has an evil spirit. Is it possible for an evil spirit to make blind people see?
Then came the feast of the opening of the Temple in Jerusalem: it was winter;
And Jesus was walking in the Temple, in Solomon's covered way.
Then the Jews came round him, saying, how long are you going to keep us in doubt? If you are the Christ, say so clearly.
Jesus said in answer, I have said it and you have no belief: the works which I do in my Father's name, these give witness about me.
But you have no belief because you are not of my sheep.
My sheep give ear to my voice, and I have knowledge of them, and they come after me:
And I give them eternal life; they will never come to destruction, and no one will ever take them out of my hand.
That which my Father has given to me has more value than all; and no one is able to take anything out of the Father's hand.
I and my Father are one.
Then the Jews took up stones again to send at him.
Jesus said to them in answer, I have let you see a number of good works from the Father; for which of those works are you stoning me?
This was their answer: We are not stoning you for a good work but for evil words; because being a man you make yourself God.
In answer, Jesus said, Is there not a saying in your law, I said, You are gods?
If he said they were gods, to whom the word of God came (and the Writings may not be broken),
Do you say of him whom the Father made holy and sent into the world, Your words are evil; because I said, I am God's Son?
If I am not doing the works of my Father, do not have belief in me;
But if I am doing them, then have belief in the works even if you have no belief in me; so that you may see clearly and be certain that the Father is in me and I am in the Father.
Then again they made an attempt to take him; but he got away from them.
And he went again to the other side of the Jordan, to the place where John first gave baptism; and he was there for a time.
And a great number of people came to him, saying, John did no sign: but everything John said of this man was true.
And a number came to have faith in him there.
Now a certain man named Lazarus was ill; he was of Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha.
(The Mary whose brother Lazarus was ill, was the Mary who put perfumed oil on the Lord and made his feet dry with her hair.)
So the sisters sent to him, saying, Lord, your dear friend is ill.
When this came to his ears, Jesus said, The end of this disease is not death, but the glory of God, so that the Son of God may have glory because of it.
Now Jesus had love in his heart for Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
So when the news came to him that Lazarus was ill, he did not go from the place where he was for two days.
Then after that time he said to his disciples, Let us go into Judaea again.
The disciples said to him, Master, the Jews were attempting only the other day to have you stoned, and are you going back there again?
Then Jesus said in answer, Are there not twelve hours in the day? A man may go about in the day without falling, because he sees the light of this world.
But if a man goes about in the night, he may have a fall because the light is not in him.
These things said he: and after that he said to them, Lazarus our friend is at rest; but I go so that I may make him come out of his sleep.
Then his disciples said to him, Lord, if he is resting he will get well.
Jesus, however, was talking of his death: but they had the idea that he was talking about taking rest in sleep.
Then Jesus said to them clearly, Lazarus is dead.
And because of you I am glad I was not there, so that you may have faith; but let us go to him.
Then Thomas, who was named Didymus, said to the other disciples, Let us go so that we may be with him in death.
Now when Jesus came, he made the discovery that Lazarus had been put into the earth four days before.
Now Bethany was near to Jerusalem, about two miles away;
And a number of Jews had come to Martha and Mary to give them comfort about their brother.
When Martha had the news that Jesus was on the way, she went out to him, but Mary did not go from the house.
Then Martha said to Jesus, Lord, if you had been here my brother would not be dead.
But I am certain that, even now, whatever request you make to God, God will give it to you.
Jesus said to her, Your brother will come to life again.
Martha said to him, I am certain that he will come to life again when all come back from the dead at the last day.
Jesus said to her, I am myself that day and that life; he who has faith in me will have life even if he is dead;
And no one who is living and has faith in me will ever see death. Is this your faith?
She said to him, Yes, Lord: my faith is that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who was to come into the world.
And having said this, she went away and said secretly to her sister Mary, The Master is here and has sent for you.
And Mary, hearing this, got up quickly and went to him.
Now Jesus had not at this time come into the town, but was still in the place where Martha had seen him.
Then the Jews who were with her in the house, comforting her, when they saw Mary get up quickly and go out, went after her in the belief that she was going to the place of the dead and would be weeping there.
When Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him, she went down at his feet, saying, Lord, if you had been here my brother would not be dead.
And when Jesus saw her weeping, and saw the Jews weeping who came with her, his spirit was moved and he was troubled,
And said, Where have you put him? They said, Come and see, Lord.
And Jesus himself was weeping.
So the Jews said, See how dear he was to him!
But some of them said, This man, who made open the eyes of the blind man, was he not able to keep his friend from death?
So Jesus, deeply troubled in heart, came to the place of the dead. It was a hole in the rock, and a stone was over the opening.
Jesus said, Take away the stone. Martha, the sister of him who was dead, said, Lord, by this time the body will be smelling, for he has been dead four days.
Jesus said to her, Did I not say to you that if you had faith you would see the glory of God?
So they took away the stone. And Jesus, looking up to heaven, said, Father, I give praise to you for hearing me.
I was certain that your ears are at all times open to me, but I said it because of these who are here, so that they may see that you sent me.
Then he said in a loud voice, Lazarus, come out!
And he who was dead came out, with linen bands folded tightly about his hands and feet, and a cloth about his face. Jesus said to them, Make him free and let him go.
Then a number of the Jews who had come to Mary and had seen the things which Jesus did had belief in him.
But some of them went to the Pharisees with the news of what Jesus had done.
Then the high priests and the Pharisees had a meeting and said, What are we doing? This man is doing a number of signs.
If we let him go on in this way, everybody will have belief in him and the Romans will come and take away our place and our nation.
But one of them, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them, You have no knowledge of anything;
You do not see that it is in your interest for one man to be put to death for the people, so that all the nation may not come to destruction.
He did not say this of himself, but being the high priest that year he said, as a prophet, that Jesus would be put to death for the nation;
And not for that nation only, but for the purpose of uniting in one body the children of God all over the world.
And from that day they took thought together how to put him to death.
So Jesus no longer went about publicly among the Jews, but went from there into the country near to the waste land, to a town named Ephraim, where he was for some time with the disciples.
Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and numbers of people went up from the country to Jerusalem to make themselves clean before the Passover.
They were looking for Jesus and saying to one another while they were in the Temple, What is your opinion? Will he not come to the feast?
Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that if anyone had knowledge where he was, he was to give them word, so that they might take him.
Then, six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had made to come back from the dead.
So they made him a meal there, and he was waited on by Martha, and Lazarus was among those who were seated with him at table.
Then Mary, taking a pound of perfumed oil of great value, put it on the feet of Jesus and made them dry with her hair: and the house became full of the smell of the perfume.
But one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot (who was to give him up), said,
Why was not this perfume traded for three hundred pence, and the money given to the poor?
(He said this, not because he had any love for the poor; but because he was a thief, and, having the money-bag, took for himself what was put into it.)
Then Jesus said, Let her be. Let her keep what she has for the day of my death.
The poor you have ever with you, but me you have not for ever.
Then a great number of the Jews had news that he was there: and they came, not only because of Jesus, but so that they might see Lazarus who had been dead and to whom he had given life.
Now there was talk among the chief priests of putting Lazarus to death;
For because of him a great number of the Jews went away and had belief in Jesus.
The day after, a great number of people who were there for the feast, when they had the news that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
Took branches of palm-trees and went out to him, crying, A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel!
And Jesus saw a young ass and took his seat on it; as the Writings say,
Have no fear, daughter of Zion: see your King is coming, seated on a young ass.
(These things were not clear to his disciples at first: but when Jesus had been lifted up into his glory, then it came to their minds that these things in the Writings were about him and that they had been done to him.)
Now the people who were with him when his voice came to Lazarus in the place of the dead, and gave him life again, had been talking about it.
And that was the reason the people went out to him, because it had come to their ears that he had done this sign.
Then the Pharisees said one to another, You see, you are unable to do anything: the world has gone after him.
Now there were some Greeks among the people who had come up to give worship at the feast:
They came to Philip, who was of Beth-saida in Galilee, and made a request, saying, Sir, we have a desire to see Jesus.
Philip went and gave word of it to Andrew; and Andrew went with Philip to Jesus.
And Jesus said to them in answer, The hour of the glory of the Son of man has come.
Truly I say to you, If a seed of grain does not go into the earth and come to an end, it is still a seed and no more; but through its death it gives much fruit.
He who is in love with life will have it taken from him; and he who has no care for his life in this world will keep it for ever and ever.
If any man is my servant, let him come after me; and where I am, there will my servant be. If any man becomes my servant, my Father will give him honour.
Now is my soul troubled; and what am I to say? Father, keep me from this hour. No: for this purpose have I come to this hour.
Father, give glory to your name. Then there came a voice out of heaven, saying, I have given it glory, and I will give it glory again.
Hearing the sound, a number of people who were there said that it was thunder: others said, An angel was talking to him.
Jesus said in answer, This voice came not for me but for you.
Now is this world to be judged: now will the ruler of this world be sent out.
And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will make all men come to me.
(This he said, pointing to the sort of death he would have.)
Then the people in answer said to him, The law says that the Christ will have life without end: how say you then that it is necessary for the Son of man to be lifted up? Who is this Son of man?
Jesus said to them, For a little time longer the light will be among you; while you have the light go on walking in it, so that the dark may not overtake you: one walking in the dark has no knowledge of where he is going.
In so far as you have the light, put your faith in the light so that you may become sons of light. With these words Jesus went away and for a time was not seen again by them.
But though he had done such a number of signs before them, they still had no belief in him:
So that the words of the prophet Isaiah might come true, when he said, Lord, who has any belief in our preaching? and the arm of the Lord, to whom has it been unveiled?
For this reason they were unable to have belief, because Isaiah said again,
He has made their eyes blind, and their hearts hard; for fear that they might see with their eyes and get knowledge with their hearts, and be changed, and I might make them well.
(Isaiah said these words because he saw his glory. His words were about him.)
However, a number even of the rulers had belief in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not say so openly for fear that they might be shut out from the Synagogue:
For the praise of men was dearer to them than the approval of God.
Then Jesus said with a loud voice, He who has faith in me, has faith not in me, but in him who sent me.
And he who sees me, sees him who sent me.
I have come as a light into the world, so that no one who has faith in me will go on living in the dark.
And if any man gives ear to my words and does not keep them, I am not his judge: I did not come to be judge of the world but to give salvation to the world.
He who puts me on one side and does not take my words to heart, is not without a judge: the word which I have said will be his judge on the last day.
For I have not said it on my authority, but the Father who sent me gave me orders what to say and how to say it.
And I have knowledge that his order is eternal life: so that the things which I say, I say them even as the Father says them to me.
Now before the feast of the Passover, it was clear to Jesus that the time had come for him to go away from this world to the Father. Having once had love for those in the world who were his, his love for them went on to the end.
So while a meal was going on, the Evil One having now put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to be false to him,
Jesus, being conscious that the Father had put everything into his hands, and that he came from God and was going to God,
Got up from table, put off his robe and took a cloth and put it round him.
Then he put water into a basin and was washing the feet of the disciples and drying them with the cloth which was round him.
So he came to Simon Peter. Peter said, Lord, are my feet to be washed by you?
And Jesus, answering, said to him, What I do is not clear to you now, but it will be clear to you in time to come.
Peter said, I will never let my feet be washed by you, never. Jesus said in answer, If I do not make you clean you have no part with me.
Simon Peter said to him, Lord, not my feet only, but my hands and my head.
Jesus said to him, He who is bathed has need only to have his feet washed and then he is clean all over: and you, my disciples, are clean, but not all of you.
(He had knowledge who was false to him; that is why he said, You are not all clean.)
Then, after washing their feet and putting on his robe again, he took his seat and said to them, Do you see what I have done to you?
You give me the name of Master and Lord: and you are right; that is what I am.
If then I, the Lord and the Master, have made your feet clean, it is right for you to make one another's feet clean.
I have given you an example, so that you may do what I have done to you.
Truly I say to you, A servant is not greater than his lord; and he who is sent is not greater than the one who sent him.
If these things are clear to you, happy are you if you do them.
I am not talking of you all: I have knowledge of my true disciples, but things are as they are, so that the Writings may come true, The foot of him who takes bread with me is lifted up against me.
From this time forward, I give you knowledge of things before they come about, so that when they come about you may have belief that I am he.
Truly I say to you, He who takes to his heart anyone whom I send, takes me to his heart; and he who so takes me, takes him who sent me.
When Jesus had said this he was troubled in spirit, and gave witness, saying, Truly I say to you, that one of you will be false to me.
Then the eyes of the disciples were turned on one another, in doubt as to whom he had in mind.
There was at table one of his disciples, the one dear to Jesus, resting his head on Jesus' breast.
Making a sign to him, Simon Peter said, Who is it he is talking about?
He, then, resting his head on Jesus' breast, said to him, Lord, who is it?
This was the answer Jesus gave: It is the one to whom I will give this bit of bread after I have put it in the vessel. Then he took the bit of bread, put it into the vessel, and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot.
And when Judas took the bread Satan went into him. Then Jesus said to him, Do quickly what you have to do.
Now it was not clear to anyone at table why he said this to him.
Some were of the opinion that because Judas kept the money-bag Jesus said to him, Get the things we have need of for the feast; or, that he was to give something to the poor.
So Judas, having taken the bit of bread, straight away went out: and it was night.
Then when he had gone out, Jesus said, Now is glory given to the Son of man, and God is given glory in him.
If God is given glory in him, God will give him glory in himself, and will give him glory even now.
My dear children, I am only to be with you a little longer. Then you will be looking for me: and as I said to the Jews, so now I say to you, Where I am going you may not come.
I give you a new law: Have love one for another; even as I have had love for you, so are you to have love one for another.
By this it will be clear to all men that you are my disciples, if you have love one for another.
Simon Peter said to him, Lord, where are you going? Jesus said in answer, Where I am going you may not come with me now, but you will come later.
Peter said to him, Why may I not come with you even now? I will give up my life for you.
Jesus said in answer, Will you give up your life for me? Truly I say to you, Before the cry of the cock you will have said three times that you are not my disciple.
Let not your heart be troubled: have faith in God and have faith in me.
In my Father's house are rooms enough; if it was not so, would I have said that I am going to make ready a place for you?
And if I go and make ready a place for you, I will come back again and will take you to be with me, so that you may be where I am.
And you all have knowledge of where I am going, and of the way to it.
Thomas said, Lord, we have no knowledge of where you are going; how may we have knowledge of the way?
Jesus said to him, I am the true and living way: no one comes to the Father but by me.
If you had knowledge of me, you would have knowledge of my Father: you have knowledge of him now and have seen him.
Philip said to him, Lord, let us see the Father, and we have need of nothing more.
Jesus said to him, Philip, have I been with you all this time, and still you have no knowledge of me? He who has seen me has seen the Father. Why do you say, Let us see the Father?
Have you not faith that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words which I say to you, I say not from myself: but the Father who is in me all the time does his works.
Have faith that I am in the Father and that the Father is in me: at least, have faith in me because of what I do.
Truly I say to you, He who puts his faith in me will do the very works which I do, and he will do greater things than these, because I am going to my Father.
And whatever request you make in my name, that I will do, so that the Father may have glory in the Son.
If you make any request to me in my name, I will do it.
If you have love for me, you will keep my laws.
And I will make prayer to the Father and he will give you another Helper to be with you for ever,
Even the Spirit of true knowledge. That Spirit the world is not able to take to its heart because it sees him not and has no knowledge of him: but you have knowledge of him, because he is ever with you and will be in you.
I will not let you be without a friend: I am coming to you.
A little time longer, and the world will see me no more; but you will see me; and you will be living because I am living.
At that time it will be clear to you that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I in you.
He who has my laws and keeps them, he it is who has love for me: and he who has love for me will be loved by my Father, and I will have love for him and will let myself be seen clearly by him.
Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, How is it that you will let yourself be seen clearly by us and not by the world?
Jesus said to him in answer, If anyone has love for me, he will keep my words: and he will be dear to my Father; and we will come to him and make our living-place with him.
He who has no love for me does not keep my words; and the word which you are hearing is not my word but the Father's who sent me.
I have said all this to you while I am still with you.
But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will be your teacher in all things and will put you in mind of everything I have said to you.
May peace be with you; my peace I give to you: I give it not as the world gives. Let not your heart be troubled; let it be without fear.
Keep in mind how I said to you, I go away and come to you again. If you had love for me you would be glad, because I am going to the Father: for the Father is greater than I.
And now I have given you word of it before it comes, so that, when it comes, you may have faith.
After this I will not say much to you, because the ruler of this world comes: and he has no power over me;
But he comes so that the world may see that I have love for the Father, and that I am doing as I am ordered by the Father. Get up, and let us go.
I am the true vine and my Father is the gardener.
He takes away every branch in me which has no fruit, and every branch which has fruit he makes clean, so that it may have more fruit.
You are clean, even now, through the teaching which I have given you.
Be in me at all times as I am in you. As the branch is not able to give fruit of itself, if it is not still on the vine, so you are not able to do so if you are not in me.
I am the vine, you are the branches: he who is in me at all times as I am in him, gives much fruit, because without me you are able to do nothing.
If a man does not keep himself in me, he becomes dead and is cut off like a dry branch; such branches are taken up and put in the fire and burned.
If you are in me at all times, and my words are in you, then anything for which you make a request will be done for you.
Here is my Father's glory, in that you give much fruit and so are my true disciples.
Even as the Father has given me his love, so I have given my love to you: be ever in my love.
If you keep my laws, you will be ever in my love, even as I have kept my Father's laws, and am ever in his love.
I have said these things to you so that I may have joy in you and so that your joy may be complete.
This is the law I give you: Have love one for another, even as I have love for you.
Greater love has no man than this, that a man gives up his life for his friends.
You are my friends, if you do what I give you orders to do.
No longer do I give you the name of servants; because a servant is without knowledge of what his master is doing: I give you the name of friends, because I have given you knowledge of all the things which my Father has said to me.
You did not take me for yourselves, but I took you for myself; and I gave you the work of going about and producing fruit which will be for ever; so that whatever request you make to the Father in my name he may give it to you.
So this is my law for you: Have love one for another.
If you are hated by the world, keep in mind that I was hated by the world before you.
If you were of the world, you would be loved by the world: but because you are not of the world, but I have taken you out of the world, you are hated by the world.
Keep in mind the words I said to you, A servant is not greater than his lord. If they were cruel to me, they will be cruel to you; if they kept my words, they will keep yours.
They will do all this to you because of my name — because they have no knowledge of him who sent me.
If I had not come and been their teacher they would have had no sin: but now they have no reason to give for their sin.
He who has hate for me has hate for my Father.
If I had not done among them the works which no other man ever did, they would have had no sin: but now they have seen, and they have had hate in their hearts for me and my Father.
This comes about so that the writing in their law may be made true, Their hate for me was without cause.
When the Helper comes, whom I will send to you from the Father even the Spirit of true knowledge who comes from the Father — he will give witness about me;
And you, in addition, will give witness because you have been with me from the first.
I have said these things to you so that you may not be in doubt.
They will put you out of the Synagogues: yes, the time is coming when whoever puts you to death will have the belief that he is doing God's pleasure.
They will do these things to you because they have not had knowledge of the Father or of me.
I have said these things to you so that when the time comes, what I have said may come to your mind. I did not say them to you at the first, because then I was still with you.
But now I am going to him who sent me; and not one of you says to me, Where are you going?
But your hearts are full of sorrow because I have said these things.
But what I am saying is true: my going is for your good: for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you.
And he, when he comes, will make the world conscious of sin, and of righteousness, and of being judged:
Of sin, because they have not faith in me;
Of righteousness, because I go to the Father and you will see me no more;
Of being judged, because the ruler of this world has been judged.
I have still much to say to you, but you are not strong enough for it now.
However, when he, the Spirit of true knowledge, has come, he will be your guide into all true knowledge: for his words will not come from himself, but whatever has come to his hearing, that he will say: and he will make clear to you the things to come.
He will give me glory, because he will take of what is mine, and make it clear to you.
Everything which the Father has is mine: that is why I say, He will take of what is mine and will make it clear to you.
After a little time you will see me no longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me.
So some of the disciples said one to another, What is this he is saying, After a little time, you will see me no longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me? and, I am going to the Father?
So they said again and again, What is this he is saying, A little time? His words are not clear to us.
Jesus saw that they had a desire to put the question to him, so he said to them, Is this what you are questioning one with another, why I said, After a little time, you will see me no longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me?
Truly I say to you, You will be weeping and sorrowing, but the world will be glad: you will be sad, but your sorrow will be turned into joy.
When a woman is about to give birth she has sorrow, because her hour is come; but when she has given birth to the child, the pain is put out of her mind by the joy that a man has come into the world.
So you have sorrow now: but I will see you again, and your hearts will be glad, and no one will take away your joy.
And on that day you will put no questions to me. Truly I say to you, Whatever request you make to the Father, he will give it to you in my name.
Up to now you have made no request in my name: do so, and it will be answered, so that your hearts may be full of joy.
All this I have said to you in veiled language: but the time is coming when I will no longer say things in veiled language but will give you knowledge of the Father clearly.
In that day you will make requests in my name: and I do not say that I will make prayer to the Father for you,
For the Father himself gives his love to you, because you have given your love to me and have had faith that I came from God.
I came out from the Father and have come into the world: again, I go away from the world and go to the Father.
His disciples said, Now you are talking clearly and not in veiled language.
Now we are certain that you have knowledge of all things and have no need for anyone to put questions to you: through this we have faith that you came from God.
Jesus made answer, Have you faith now?
See, a time is coming, yes, it is now here, when you will go away in all directions, every man to his house, and I will be by myself: but I am not by myself, because the Father is with me.
I have said all these things to you so that in me you may have peace. In the world you have trouble: but take heart! I have overcome the world.
Jesus said these things; then, lifting his eyes to heaven, he said, Father, the time has now come; give glory to your Son, so that the Son may give glory to you:
Even as you gave him authority over all flesh, to give eternal life to all those whom you have given to him.
And this is eternal life: to have knowledge of you, the only true God, and of him whom you have sent, even Jesus Christ.
I have given you glory on the earth, having done all the work which you gave me to do.
And now, Father, let me have glory with you, even that glory which I had with you before the world was.
I have given knowledge of your name to the men whom you gave me out of the world: yours they were, and you gave them to me, and they have kept your words.
Now it is clear to them that whatever you have given to me comes from you:
Because I have given them the words which you gave to me; and they have taken them to heart, and have certain knowledge that I came from you, and they have faith that you sent me.
My prayer is for them: my prayer is not for the world, but for those whom you have given to me, because they are yours
(All mine are yours, and yours are mine) and I have glory in them.
And now I will be no longer in the world, but they are in the world and I come to you. Holy Father, keep them in your name which you have given to me, so that they may be one even as we are one.
While I was with them I kept them safe in your name which you have given to me: I took care of them and not one of them has come to destruction, but only the son of destruction, so that the Writings might come true.
And now I come to you; and these things I say in the world so that they may have my joy complete in them.
I have given your word to them; and they are hated by the world, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
My prayer is not that you will take them out of the world, but that you will keep them from the Evil One.
They are not of the world any more than I am of the world.
Make them holy by the true word: your word is the true word.
Even as you have sent me into the world, so I have sent them into the world.
And for them I make myself holy, so that they may be made truly holy.
My prayer is not for them only, but for all who will have faith in me through their word;
May they all be one! Even as you, Father, are in me and I am in you, so let them be in us, so that all men may come to have faith that you sent me.
And the glory which you have given to me I have given to them, so that they may be one even as we are one;
I in them, and you in me, so that they may be made completely one, and so that it may become clear to all men that you have sent me and that they are loved by you as I am loved by you.
Father, it is my desire that these whom you have given to me may be by my side where I am, so that they may see my glory which you have given to me, because you had love for me before the world came into being.
Father of righteousness, I have knowledge of you, though the world has not; and to these it is clear that you sent me;
And I have given to them knowledge of your name, and will give it, so that the love which you have for me may be in them and I in them.
When Jesus had said these words he went out with his disciples over the stream Kedron to a garden, into which he went with his disciples.
And Judas, who was false to him, had knowledge of the place because Jesus went there frequently with his disciples.
So Judas, getting a band of armed men and police from the chief priests and Pharisees, went there with lights and with arms.
Then Jesus, having knowledge of everything which was coming on him, went forward and said to them, Who are you looking for?
Their answer was, Jesus the Nazarene. Jesus said, I am he. And Judas, who was false to him, was there at their side.
And when he said to them, I am he, they went back, falling to the earth.
So again he put the question to them, Who are you looking for? And they said, Jesus the Nazarene.
Jesus made answer, I have said that I am he; if you are looking for me, let these men go away.
(He said this so that his words might come true, I have kept safe all those whom you gave to me.)
Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, took it out and gave the high priest's servant a blow, cutting off his right ear. The servant's name was Malchus.
Then Jesus said to Peter, Put back your sword: am I not to take the cup which my Father has given to me?
Then the band and the chief captain and the police took Jesus and put cords round him.
They took him first to Annas, because Annas was the father-in-law of Caiaphas who was the high priest that year.
It was Caiaphas who had said to the Jews that it was in their interest for one man to be put to death for the people.
And Simon Peter went after Jesus with another disciple. Now that disciple was a friend of the high priest and he went in with Jesus into the house of the high priest;
But Peter was kept outside at the door. Then this other disciple, who was a friend of the high priest, came out and had a word with the girl who kept the door, and took Peter in.
Then the girl who was the door-keeper said to Peter, Are you not one of this man's disciples? In answer he said, I am not.
Now the servants and the police had made a fire of coals because it was cold; they were warming themselves in front of it and Peter was there with them, warming himself.
Then the high priest put questions to Jesus about his disciples and his teaching.
Jesus made answer, I said things openly to the world at all times; I have given my teaching in the Synagogues and in the Temple to which all the Jews come; and I have said nothing secretly.
Why are you questioning me? put questions to my hearers about what I have said to them: they have knowledge of what I said.
When he said this, one of the police by his side gave him a blow with his open hand, saying, Do you give such an answer to the high priest?
Jesus said in answer, If I have said anything evil, give witness to the evil: but if I said what is true, why do you give me blows?
Then Annas sent him chained to Caiaphas, the high priest.
But Simon Peter was still there warming himself by the fire. They said to him, Are you not one of his disciples? He said, No, I am not.
One of the servants of the high priest, a relation of him whose ear had been cut off by Peter, said, Did I not see you with him in the garden?
Then again Peter said, No. And straight away a cock gave its cry.
So they took Jesus from the house of Caiaphas to the Praetorium. It was early. They themselves did not go into the Praetorium, so that they might not become unclean, but might take the Passover.
So Pilate came out to them and put the question: What have you to say against this man?
They said to him in answer, If the man was not a wrongdoer we would not have given him up to you.
Then Pilate said to them, Take him yourselves and let him be judged by your law. But the Jews said to him, We have no right to put any man to death.
(That the word of Jesus might come true, pointing to the sort of death he would have.)
Then Pilate went back into the Praetorium and sent for Jesus and said to him, Are you the King of the Jews?
Jesus made answer, Do you say this of yourself, or did others say it about me?
Pilate said, Am I a Jew? Your nation and the chief priests have given you into my hands: what have you done?
Jesus said in answer, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom was of this world, my disciples would have made a good fight to keep me out of the hands of the Jews: but my kingdom is not here.
Then Pilate said to him, Are you then a king? Jesus made answer, You say that I am a king. For this purpose was I given birth, and for this purpose I came into the world, that I might give witness to what is true. Every lover of what is true gives ear to my voice.
Pilate said to him, True? what is true? Having said this he went out again to the Jews and said to them, I see no wrong in him.
But every year you make a request to me to let a prisoner go free at the Passover. Is it your desire that I let the King of the Jews go free?
Then again they gave a loud cry, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was an outlaw.
Then Pilate took Jesus and had him whipped with cords.
And the men of the army made a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and they put a purple robe on him.
And they kept coming and saying, Long life to the King of the Jews! And they gave him blows with their hands.
And Pilate went out again and said to them, See, I let him come out to you to make it clear to you that I see no wrong in him.
Then Jesus came out with the crown of thorns and the purple robe. And Pilate said to them, Here is the man!
So when the chief priests and the police saw him they gave a loud cry, To the cross! to the cross! Pilate said to them, Take him yourselves and put him on the cross: I see no crime in him.
And the Jews made answer, We have a law, and by that law it is right for him to be put to death because he said he was the Son of God.
When this saying came to Pilate's ears his fear became greater;
And he went again into the Praetorium and said to Jesus, Where do you come from? But Jesus gave him no answer.
Then Pilate said to him, You say nothing to me? is it not clear to you that I have power to let you go free and power to put you to death on the cross?
Jesus gave this answer: You would have no power at all over me if it was not given to you by God; so that he who gave me up to you has the greater sin.
Hearing this, Pilate had a desire to let him go free, but the Jews said in a loud voice, If you let this man go, you are not Caesar's friend: everyone who makes himself a king goes against Caesar.
So when these words came to Pilate's ear, he took Jesus out, seating himself in the judge's seat in a place named in Hebrew, Gabbatha, or the Stone Floor.
(It was the day when they made ready for the Passover; and it was about the sixth hour.) And he said to the Jews, There is your King!
Then they gave a loud cry, Away with him! away with him! to the cross! Pilate said to them, Am I to put your King to death on the cross? The chief priests said in answer, We have no king but Caesar.
So then he gave him up to them to be put to death on the cross. And they took Jesus away;
And he went out with his cross on him to the place which is named Dead Man's Head (in Hebrew, Golgotha):
Where they put him on the cross with two others, one on this side and one on that, and Jesus in the middle.
And Pilate put on the cross a statement in writing. The writing was: JESUS THE NAZARENE, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
The writing was seen by a number of the Jews, for the place where Jesus was put to death on the cross was near the town; and the writing was in Hebrew and Latin and Greek.
Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, Do not put, The King of the Jews, but, He said, I am the King of the Jews.
But Pilate made answer, What I have put in writing will not be changed.
And when Jesus was nailed to the cross, the men of the army took his clothing, and made a division of it into four parts, to every man a part, and they took his coat: now the coat was without a join, made out of one bit of cloth.
So they said among themselves, Let this not be cut up, but let us put it to the decision of chance and see who gets it. (They did this so that the Writings might come true, which say, They made a distribution of my clothing among them, and my coat they put to the decision of chance.) This was what the men of the army did.
Now by the side of the cross of Jesus were his mother, and his mother's sister Mary, the wife of Cleopas, and Mary Magdalene.
So when Jesus saw his mother and the disciple who was dear to him, he said to his mother, Mother, there is your son!
Then he said to the disciple, There is your mother! And from that hour the disciple took her to his house.
After this, being conscious that all things had now been done so that the Writings might come true, Jesus said, Give me water.
Now there was a vessel ready, full of bitter wine, and they put a sponge full of it on a stick and put it to his mouth.
So when Jesus had taken the wine he said, All is done. And with his head bent he gave up his spirit.
Now it was the day of getting ready for the Passover, and so that the bodies might not be on the cross on the Sabbath (because the day of that Sabbath was a great day), the Jews made a request to Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away.
So the men of the army came, and the legs of the first were broken and then of the other who was put to death on the cross with Jesus:
But when they came to Jesus, they saw that he was dead by this time, and so his legs were not broken;
But one of the men made a wound in his side with a spear, and straight away there came out blood and water.
And he who saw it has given witness (and his witness is true; he is certain that what he says is true) so that you may have belief.
These things came about so that the Writings might be true, No bone of his body will be broken.
And again another verse says, They will see him who was wounded by their spears.
After these things, Joseph of Arimathaea, who was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, made a request to Pilate to let him take away the body of Jesus: and Pilate said he might do so. So he went and took away his body.
And Nicodemus came (he who had first come to Jesus by night) with a roll of myrrh and aloes mixed, about a hundred pounds.
Then they took the body of Jesus, folding linen about it with the spices, as is the way of the Jews when they put the dead to rest.
Now there was a garden near the cross, and in the garden a new place for the dead in which no man had ever been put.
So they put Jesus there, because it was the Jews' day of getting ready for the Passover, and the place was near.
Now on the first day of the week, very early, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene came to the place and saw that the stone had been taken away from it.
Then she went running to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple who was loved by Jesus, and said to them, They have taken away the Lord out of the place of the dead and we have no knowledge where they have put him.
So Peter and the other disciple went out to the place of the dead.
They went running together, and the other disciple got in front of Peter and came first to the hole in the rock;
And looking in, he saw the linen bands on the earth; but he did not go in,
Then Simon Peter came after him and went into the hole in the rock; and he saw the linen bands on the earth,
And the cloth, which had been round his head, not with the linen bands but rolled up in a place by itself.
Then the other disciple who came there first went in; and he saw and belief came to him.
For at that time they had no knowledge that the Writings said that he would have to come again from the dead.
So then the disciples went away again to their houses.
But Mary was still there outside the hole in the rock, weeping; and while she was weeping and looking into the hole,
She saw two angels in white seated where the body of Jesus had been, one at the head and the other at the feet.
They said to her, Woman, why are you weeping? She said to them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I have no knowledge where they have put him.
And then looking round, she saw Jesus there, but had no idea that it was Jesus.
Jesus said to her, Woman, why are you weeping? who are you looking for? She, taking him for the gardener, said to him, Sir, if you have taken him away from here, say where you have put him and I will take him away.
Jesus said to her, Mary! Turning, she said to him in Hebrew, Rabboni! (which is to say, Master).
Jesus said to her, Do not put your hand on me, for I have not gone up to the Father: but go to my brothers and say to them, I go up to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.
Mary Magdalene went with the news to the disciples, and said she had seen the Lord and that he had said these things to her.
At evening on that day, the first day of the week, when, for fear of the Jews, the doors were shut where the disciples were, Jesus came among them and said to them, May peace be with you!
And when he had said this, he let them see his hands and his side. Then the disciples were glad when they saw the Lord.
And Jesus said to them again, May peace be with you! As the Father sent me, even so I now send you.
And when he had said this, breathing on them, he said to them, Let the Holy Spirit come on you:
Any to whom you give forgiveness, will be made free from their sins; and any from whom you keep back forgiveness, will still be in their sins.
Now Thomas, one of the twelve, named Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.
So the other disciples said to him, We have seen the Lord. But he said to them, If I do not see in his hands the print of the nails and put my finger into the print of the nails, and if I do not put my hand into his side, I will never have belief.
And after eight days, his disciples were again in the house and Thomas was with them. Though the doors were shut, Jesus came, and taking his place in the middle of them, he said, May peace be with you!
Then he said to Thomas, Put out your finger, and see my hands; and put your hand here into my side: and be no longer in doubt but have belief.
And Thomas said in answer, My Lord and my God!
Jesus said to him, Because you have seen me you have belief: a blessing will be on those who have belief though they have not seen me!
A number of other signs Jesus did before his disciples which are not recorded in this book:
But these are recorded, so that you may have faith that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and so that, having this faith you may have life in his name.
After these things Jesus let himself be seen again by the disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and it came about in this way.
Simon Peter, Thomas named Didymus, Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were all together.
Simon Peter said to them, I am going fishing. They said to him, And we will come with you. They went out and got into the boat; but that night they took no fish.
Now very early in the morning Jesus was there by the edge of the sea (though the disciples were not conscious that it was Jesus).
So Jesus said to them, Children, have you taken any fish? They made answer, No.
And he said to them, Let down the net on the right side of the boat and you will get some. So they put it in the water and now they were not able to get it up again because of the great number of fish.
So the disciple who was dear to Jesus said to Peter, It is the Lord! Hearing that it was the Lord, Peter put his coat round him (because he was not clothed) and went into the sea.
And the other disciples came in the little boat (they were not far from land, only about two hundred cubits off) pulling the net full of fish.
When they got to land, they saw a fire of coals there, with fish cooking on it, and bread.
Jesus said to them, Get some of the fish which you have now taken.
So Peter went to the boat and came back pulling the net to land, full of great fish, a hundred and fifty-three; and though there was such a number the net was not broken.
Jesus said to them, Come and take some food. And all the disciples were in fear of putting the question, Who are you? being conscious that it was the Lord.
Then Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them, and the fish in the same way.
Now this was the third time that Jesus let himself be seen by the disciples after he had come back from the dead.
Then when they had taken food, Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon, son of John, is your love for me greater than the love of these others? He said to him, Yes, Lord; you are certain of my love for you. He said to him, Then give my lambs food.
Again, a second time, he said to him, Simon, son of John, have you any love for me? Yes, Lord, he said, you are certain of my love for you. Then take care of my sheep, said Jesus.
He said to him a third time, Simon, son of John, am I dear to you? Now Peter was troubled in his heart because he put the question a third time, Am I dear to you? And he said to him, Lord, you have knowledge of all things; you see that you are dear to me. Jesus said to him, Then give my sheep food.
Truly I say to you, When you were young, you made yourself ready and went wherever you had a desire to go: but when you are old, you will put out your hands and another will make you ready, and you will be taken where you have no desire to go.
Now this he said, pointing out the sort of death by which he would give God glory. And after saying this, he said to him, Come after me.
Then Peter, turning round, saw the disciple who was dear to Jesus coming after them — the disciple who was resting on his breast at the last meal, and said, Lord, who is it who will be false to you?
Seeing him, Peter said to Jesus, What about this man?
Jesus said to him, If it is my desire for him to be here till I come back, what is that to you? come yourself after me.
So this saying went about among the brothers that this disciple would not undergo death: Jesus, however, did not say that he would not undergo death, but, If it is my desire for him to be here till I come back, what is that to you?
This is the disciple who gives witness about these things and who put them in writing: and we have knowledge that his witness is true.
And Jesus did such a number of other things that, if every one was recorded, it is my opinion that even the world itself is not great enough for the books there would be.
I have given an earlier account, O Theophilus, of all the things which Jesus did, and of his teaching from the first,
Till the day when he was taken up to heaven after he had given his orders, through the Holy Spirit, to the Apostles of whom he had made selection:
And to whom he gave clear and certain signs that he was living, after his death; for he was seen by them for forty days, and gave them teaching about the kingdom of God:
And when they were all together, with him, he gave them orders not to go away from Jerusalem, but to keep there, waiting till the word of the Father was put into effect, of which, he said, I have given you knowledge:
For the baptism of John was with water, but you will have baptism with the Holy Spirit, after a little time.
So, when they were together, they said to him, Lord, will you at this time give back the kingdom to Israel?
And he said to them, It is not for you to have knowledge of the time and the order of events which the Father has kept in his control.
But you will have power, when the Holy Spirit has come on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and all Judaea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.
And when he had said these things, while they were looking, he was taken up, and went from their view into a cloud.
And while they were looking up to heaven with great attention, two men came to them, in white clothing,
And said, O men of Galilee, why are you looking up into heaven? This Jesus, who was taken from you into heaven, will come again, in the same way as you saw him go into heaven.
Then they went back to Jerusalem from the mountain named Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey away.
And when they came in, they went up into the room where they were living; Peter and John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James, the son of Alphaeus, and Simon the Zealot, and Judas, the son of James.
And they all with one mind gave themselves up to prayer, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.
And in those days Peter got up among the brothers (there were about one hundred and twenty of them), and said,
My brothers, the word of God had to be put into effect, which the Holy Spirit had said before, by the mouth of David, about Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus,
For he was numbered among us, and had his part in our work.
(Now this man, with the reward of his evil-doing, got for himself a field, and falling head first, came to a sudden and violent end there.
And this came to the knowledge of all those who were living in Jerusalem, so that the field was named in their language, Akel-dama, or, The field of blood.)
For in the book of Psalms it says, Let his house be waste, and let no man be living in it: and, Let his position be taken by another.
For this reason, of the men who have been with us all the time, while the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
Starting from the baptism of John till he went up from us, one will have to be a witness with us of his coming back from death.
And they made selection of two, Joseph, named Barsabbas, whose other name was Justus, and Matthias.
And they made prayers and said, Lord, having knowledge of the hearts of all men, make clear which of these two has been marked out by you,
To take that position as a servant and Apostle, from which Judas by his sin was shut out, so that he might go to his place.
And they put it to the decision of chance, and the decision was given for Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven Apostles.
And when the day of Pentecost was come, they were all together in one place.
And suddenly there came from heaven a sound like the rushing of a violent wind, and all the house where they were was full of it.
And they saw tongues, like flames of fire, coming to rest on every one of them.
And they were all full of the Holy Spirit, and were talking in different languages, as the Spirit gave them power.
Now there were living at Jerusalem, Jews, God-fearing men, from every nation under heaven.
And when this sound came to their ears, they all came together, and were greatly surprised because every man was hearing the words of the disciples in his special language.
And they were full of wonder and said, Are not all these men Galilaeans?
And how is it that every one of us is hearing their words in the language which was ours from our birth?
Men of Parthia, Media, and Elam, and those living in Mesopotamia, in Judaea and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia,
In Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and those who have come from Rome, Jews by birth and others who have become Jews,
Men of Crete and Arabia, to all of us they are talking in our different languages, of the great works of God.
And they were all surprised and in doubt saying to one another, What is the reason of this?
But others, making sport of them, said, They are full of new wine.
But Peter, getting up, with the eleven, said in a loud voice, O men of Judaea, and all you who are living in Jerusalem, take note of this and give ear to my words.
For these men are not overcome with wine, as it seems to you, for it is only the third hour of the day;
But this is the thing which was said by the prophet Joel;
And it will come about, in the last days, says God, that I will send out my Spirit on all flesh; and your sons and your daughters will be prophets, and your young men will see visions, and your old men will have dreams:
And on my men-servants and my women-servants I will send my Spirit, and they will be prophets.
And wonders will be seen in heaven, and signs on the earth, blood and fire and smoke:
The sun will become dark and the moon will be turned to blood, before that great day of the Lord comes in glory:
And whoever makes his prayer to the Lord will have salvation.
Men of Israel, give ear to these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man who had the approval of God, as was made clear to you by the great works and signs and wonders which God did by him among you, as you yourselves have knowledge,
Him, when he was given up, by the decision and knowledge of God, you put to death on the cross, by the hands of evil men:
But God gave him back to life, having made him free from the pains of death because it was not possible for him to be overcome by it.
For David said of him, I saw the Lord before my face at all times, for he is at my right hand, so that I may not be moved:
And for this cause my heart was glad and my tongue full of joy, and my flesh will be resting in hope:
For you will not let my soul be in hell and you will not give up your Holy One to destruction.
You have made me see the ways of life; I will be full of joy when I see your face.
My brothers, I may say to you openly that David came to his death, and was put in the earth, and his resting-place is with us today.
But being a prophet, and having in mind the oath which God had given to him, that of the fruit of his body one would take his place as a king,
He, having knowledge of the future, was talking of the coming again of Christ from the dead, that he was not kept in hell and his body did not see destruction.
This Jesus God has given back to life, of which we all are witnesses.
And so, being lifted up to the right hand of God, and having the Father's word that the Holy Spirit would come, he has sent this thing, which now you see and have knowledge of.
For David has not gone up into heaven, but says, himself, The Lord said to my Lord, Be seated at my right hand,
Till I put all those who are against you under your feet.
For this reason, let all Israel be certain that this Jesus, whom you put to death on the cross, God has made Lord and Christ.
Now when these words came to their ears their hearts were troubled, and they said to Peter and the other Apostles, Brothers, what are we to do?
And Peter said, Let your hearts be changed, every one of you, and have baptism in the name of Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of your sins; and you will have the Holy Spirit given to you.
For the word of God is for you and for your children and for all those who are far off, even all those who may be marked out by the Lord our God.
And with more such words he gave his witness, offering them salvation and saying, Come out from this evil generation.
Then those who gave hearing to his words had baptism: and about three thousand souls were joined to them that day.
And they kept their attention fixed on the Apostles' teaching and were united together in the taking of broken bread and in prayer.
But fear came on every soul: and all sorts of wonders and signs were done by the Apostles.
And all those who were of the faith kept together, and had all things in common;
And exchanging their goods and property for money, they made division of it among them all, as they had need.
And day by day, going in agreement together regularly to the Temple and, taking broken bread together in their houses, they took their food with joy and with true hearts,
Giving praise to God, and having the approval of all the people; and every day the number of those who had salvation was increased by the Lord.
Now Peter and John were going up to the Temple at the ninth hour, the hour of prayer;
And a certain man who from birth had had no power in his legs, was taken there every day, and put down at the door of the Temple which is named Beautiful, requesting money from those who went into the Temple;
He then, seeing Peter and John going into the Temple, made a request to them.
And Peter, looking at him, with John, said, Keep your eyes on us.
And he gave attention to them, hoping to get something from them.
But Peter said, I have no silver or gold, but what I have, that I give to you. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, get up on your feet.
And he took him by his right hand, lifting him up; and straight away his feet and the bones of his legs became strong,
And, jumping up, he got on to his feet and went into the Temple with them, walking and jumping and giving praise to God.
And all the people saw him walking and praising God:
And they saw that it was the man who made requests for money at the door of the Temple, and they were full of wonder and surprise at what had taken place.
And while he kept his hands on Peter and John, all the people came running together to the covered way which is named Solomon's, full of wonder.
And when Peter saw it he said to the people, You men of Israel, why are you so greatly surprised at this man? or why are you looking at us as if by our power or virtue we had given him the use of his legs?
The God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers, has given glory to his servant Jesus; whom you gave up, turning your backs on him, when Pilate had made the decision to let him go free.
But you would have nothing to do with the Holy and Upright One, and made request for a man of blood to be given to you,
And put to death the Lord of life; whom God gave back from the dead; of which fact we are witnesses.
And his name, through faith in his name, has made this man strong, whom you see and have knowledge of: yes, the faith which is through him has made him well, before you all.
And now, my brothers, I am conscious that you did this, as did your rulers, without knowledge.
But the things which God had made clear before, by the mouth of all the prophets, that the Christ would have to undergo, he has put into effect in this way.
So then, let your hearts be changed and be turned to God, so that your sins may be completely taken away, and times of blessing may come from the Lord;
And that he may send the Christ who was marked out for you from the first, even Jesus:
Who is to be kept in heaven till the time when all things are put right, of which God has given word by the mouth of his holy prophets, who have been from the earliest times.
For Moses said, The Lord will give you a prophet from among your people, like me; you will give ear to everything which he will say to you.
And every soul who does not give attention to that prophet, will be cut off from among the people.
And all the prophets from Samuel and those who came after, every one of them, gave word of these days.
You are the sons of the prophets, and of the agreement which God made with your fathers, saying to Abraham, Through your seed a blessing will come on all the families of the earth.
To you, first, God sent his servant, blessing you by turning every one of you from his sins.
And while they were talking to the people, the priests and the captain of the Temple and the Sadducees came up to them,
Being greatly troubled because they were teaching the people and preaching Jesus as an example of the coming back from the dead.
And they took them and put them in prison till the morning, for it was now evening.
But a number of those who gave hearing to the word had faith; and they were now about five thousand.
And on the day after, the rulers and those in authority and the scribes came together in Jerusalem;
And Annas, the high priest, was there, and Caiaphas and John and Alexander, and all the relations of the high priest.
Then sending for Peter and John, they said, By what power and in whose name have you done this?
Then Peter, being full of the Holy Spirit, said to them, O you rulers of the people and men of authority,
If we are questioned today about a good work done to a man who was ill, as to how he has been made well,
Take note, all of you, and all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you put to death on the cross, whom God gave back from the dead, even through him is this man now before you completely well.
He is the stone which you builders had no use for, but which has been made the chief stone of the building.
And in no other is there salvation: for there is no other name under heaven, given among men, through which we may have salvation.
Now when they saw that Peter and John were without fear, though they were men of no education or learning, they were greatly surprised; and they took note of them that they had been with Jesus.
And, seeing that the man who had been made well was there with them, they were not able to say anything against it.
But when they had given them orders to go out of the Sanhedrin, they had a discussion among themselves,
Saying, What are we to do with these men? for certainly it is clear to all who are living in Jerusalem that a most important sign has been done by them, and it is not possible to say that it is not so.
But so that it may not go farther among the people, let us put them in fear of punishment if they say anything in future in this name.
And they sent for them, and gave them orders not to make statements or give teaching in the name of Jesus.
But Peter and John in answer said to them, It is for you to say if it is right in the eyes of God to give attention to you more than to God:
For it is not possible for us to keep from saying what we have seen and have knowledge of.
And when they had said more sharp words to them, they let them go, not seeing what punishment they might give them, because of the people; for all men were giving praise to God for what had taken place.
For the man on whom this act of power was done was more than forty years old.
And when they had been made free, they came back to their friends, and gave an account of all the things which the chief priests and the authorities had said to them.
And hearing it, they all, with one mind, made prayer to God and said, O Lord, maker of heaven and earth and the sea and all things in them:
Who has said, by the Holy Spirit, through the mouth of our father David your servant, Why are the nations so violently moved, and why are the thoughts of the people so foolish?
The kings of the earth were lifted up, the rulers came together, against the Lord, and against his Christ:
For, truly, in this town, against your holy servant, Jesus, who was marked out by you as Christ, Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, came together,
To do that which had been fixed before by your hand and your purpose.
And now, Lord, take note of their cruel words, and give your servants power to be preachers of your word without fear,
While your hand is stretched out to do works of mercy; so that signs and wonders may be done through the name of your holy servant Jesus.
And when their prayer was ended, the place where they were was violently moved, and they all became full of the Holy Spirit, preaching the word of God without fear.
And all those who were of the faith were one in heart and soul: and not one of them said that any of the things which he had was his property only; but they had all things in common.
And with great power the Apostles gave witness of the coming back of the Lord Jesus from the dead; and grace was on them all.
And no one among them was in need; for everyone who had land or houses, exchanging them for money, took the price of them,
And put it at the feet of the Apostles for distribution to everyone as he had need.
And Joseph, who was given by the Apostles the name of Barnabas (the sense of which is, Son of comfort), a Levite and a man of Cyprus by birth,
Having a field, got money for it and put the money at the feet of the Apostles.
But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, got money for his property,
And kept back part of the price, his wife having knowledge of it, and took the rest and put it at the feet of the Apostles.
But Peter said, Ananias, why has the Evil One put it into your heart to be false to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back part of the price of the land?
While you had it, was it not your property? and after you had given it in exchange, was it not still in your power? how has this purpose come into your mind? you have been false, not to men, but to God.
And at these words, Ananias went down on the earth, and his life went from him: and great fear came on all who were present.
And the young men went and made ready his body, and took it out, and put it in the earth.
And about three hours after, his wife, having no knowledge of what had taken place, came in.
And Peter said to her, Give me an answer: was this amount of money the price of the land? And she said, Yes, it was.
But Peter said to her, Why have you made an agreement together to be false to the Spirit of the Lord? See, the feet of the young men who have put the body of your husband in the earth, are at the door, and they will take you out.
And straight away she went down at his feet, and her life went from her: and the young men came in and saw her dead, and they took her out and put her in the earth with her husband.
Then great fear came on all the church and on all who had knowledge of these things.
Now a number of signs and wonders were done among the people by the hands of the Apostles; and they were all together in Solomon's covered way.
The others, in fear, kept back from joining them: but the people made much of them;
And a great number of men and women had faith, and were joined to the Lord;
And they even took into the streets people who were ill, and put them on beds, so that when Peter went by, some of them might be in his shade.
And numbers of people came together from the towns round about Jerusalem, with those who were ill and those who were troubled with unclean spirits: and they were all made well.
But the high priest and those who were with him (the Sadducees) were full of envy,
And they took the Apostles and put them in the common prison.
But in the night an angel of the Lord, opening the doors of the prison, took them out and said,
Go, take your place in the Temple and give the people all the teaching about this Life.
And hearing this, they went into the Temple at dawn, and were teaching. But the high priest and those who were with him got together the Sanhedrin and the representatives of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to get them.
But the men who were sent saw that they were not in the prison, and came back with the news,
Saying, The doors of the prison were safely shut, and the keepers were at the doors, but when they were open, there was nobody inside.
Now, at these words, the captain of the Temple and the chief priests were greatly troubled about what might be the end of this business.
And someone came and said to them, The men, whom you put in prison, are in the Temple teaching the people.
Then the captain and some of the police went and took them, but not violently, for fear that they might be stoned by the people.
And they took them into the Sanhedrin, and the high priest said to them,
We gave you very clear orders not to give teaching in this name: and now Jerusalem is full of your teaching, and you are attempting to make us responsible for this man's death.
But Peter and the Apostles, answering, said, We have to do the orders of God, not of man.
The God of our fathers gave Jesus back to life, whom you had put to death, hanging him on a tree.
Him God has put on high at his right hand, as a Ruler and a Saviour, to give to Israel a change of heart and forgiveness of sins.
And we are witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who keep his laws.
But when these words came to their ears, they were cut to the heart, and had a mind to put them to death.
But one of the Sanhedrin, a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a man of learning in the law, of whom all the people had a high opinion, got up and made a suggestion for the men to be put outside for a little time.
And he said to them, Men of Israel, take care what you do about these men.
For before this there was Theudas, who said he was someone important, to whom about four hundred men gave their support: he was put to death, and his band was broken up and came to nothing.
After this man, there was Judas of Galilee, at the time of the numbering, and some of the people went after him: he was put to death, and all his supporters were put to flight.
And now I say to you, Do nothing to these men, but let them be: for if this teaching or this work is of men, it will come to nothing:
But if it is of God, you will not be able to overcome them, and you are in danger of fighting against God.
And he seemed to them to be right: and they sent for the Apostles, and, after having them whipped and giving them orders to give no teaching in the name of Jesus, they let them go.
So they went away from the Sanhedrin, happy to undergo shame for the Name.
And every day, in the Temple and privately, they went on teaching and preaching Jesus as the Christ.
Now in those days, when the number of the disciples was increasing, protests were made by the Greek Jews against the Hebrews, because their widows were not taken care of in the distribution of food every day.
And the Apostles sent for all the disciples and said, It is not right for us to give up preaching the word of God in order to make distribution of food.
Take then from among you seven men of good name, full of the Spirit and of wisdom, to whom we may give control of this business.
Then we will give all our time to prayer and the teaching of the word.
And this saying was pleasing to all of them: and they made selection of Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and Philip and Prochorus and Nicanor and Timon and Parmenas and Nicolas of Antioch, who had become a Jew:
These they took to the Apostles, who, after prayer, put their hands on them.
And the word of God was increasing in power; and the number of the disciples in Jerusalem became very great, and a great number of priests were in agreement with the faith.
And Stephen, full of grace and power, did great wonders and signs among the people.
But some of those who were of the Synagogue named that of the Libertines, and some of the men of Cyrene and of Alexandria and those from Cilicia and Asia, had arguments with Stephen.
But they were not able to get the better of him, for his words were full of wisdom and of the Spirit.
Then they got men to say, He has said evil against Moses and against God, in our hearing.
And the people, with the rulers and the scribes, were moved against him, and they came and took him before the Sanhedrin,
And they got false witnesses who said, This man is for ever saying things against this holy place and against the law:
For he has said in our hearing that this Jesus of Nazareth will put this place to destruction and make changes in the rules which were handed down to us by Moses.
And all those who were in the Sanhedrin, looking at him, saw that his face was like the face of an angel.
Then the high priest said, Are these things true?
And he said, My brothers and fathers, give hearing. The God of glory came to our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he was living in Haran,
And said to him, Go out of your land, and away from your family, and come into the land to which I will be your guide.
Then he came out of the land of the Chaldaeans, and went into Haran; and from there, when his father was dead, he was guided by God into this land, where you are living now:
And God gave him no heritage in it, not even enough to put his foot on: but he gave him an undertaking that he would give it to him and to his children after him, though he had no child at that time.
And God said that his seed would be living in a strange land, and that they would make them servants, and be cruel to them for four hundred years.
And I will be the judge, said God, of that nation which made them servants: and after that, they will come out and give me worship in this place.
And he made with him the agreement of which circumcision was the sign. And so Abraham had a son, Isaac, and gave him circumcision on the eighth day; and Isaac had a son, Jacob, and Jacob was the father of the twelve heads of the families of Israel.
And the brothers, moved with envy against Joseph, gave him to the Egyptians for money: but God was with him,
And made him free from all his troubles, and gave him wisdom and the approval of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who made him ruler over Egypt and all his house.
Now there was no food to be had in all Egypt and Canaan, and there was great trouble: and our fathers were not able to get food.
But Jacob, hearing that there was grain in Egypt, sent out our fathers the first time.
And the second time his brothers had a meeting with Joseph, and Pharaoh had knowledge of Joseph's family.
Then Joseph sent for Jacob his father and all his family, seventy-five persons.
And Jacob went down to Egypt, and came to his end there, and so did our fathers;
And they were taken over to Shechem, and put to rest in the place which Abraham got for a price in silver from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.
But when the time was near for putting into effect the undertaking which God had given to Abraham, the people were increasing in Egypt,
Till another king came to power, who had no knowledge of Joseph.
He, having evil designs against our nation, was cruel to our fathers, and they were forced to put out their young children, so that they might not go on living.
At which time Moses came to birth, and he was very beautiful; and he was kept for three months in his father's house:
And when he was put out, Pharaoh's daughter took him and kept him as her son.
And Moses was trained in all the wisdom of Egypt, and was great in his words and works.
But when he was almost forty years old, it came into his heart to go and see his brothers, the children of Israel.
And seeing one of them being attacked, he went to his help and gave the Egyptian a death-blow:
And he was hoping that his brothers would see that God had sent him to be their saviour; but they did not see.
And the day after, he came to them, while they were having a fight, and would have made peace between them, saying, Sirs, you are brothers; why do you do wrong to one another?
But the man who was doing wrong to his neighbour, pushing him away, said, Who made you a ruler and a judge over us?
Will you put me to death as you did the Egyptian yesterday?
And at these words, Moses went in flight to the land of Midian, and was living there for a time, and had two sons.
At the end of forty years, an angel came to him in the waste land of Sinai, in the flame of a burning thorn-tree.
And Moses, seeing it, was full of wonder, and when he came up to have a nearer view of it, the voice of the Lord came to him, saying,
I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob. And Moses, shaking with fear, kept his eyes from looking at it.
And the Lord said, Take off the shoes from your feet, for the place where you are is holy.
Truly, I have seen the sorrows of my people in Egypt, and their cries have come to my ears, and I have come down to make them free: and now, come, I will send you to Egypt.
This Moses, whom they would not have, saying, Who made you a ruler and a judge? him God sent to be a ruler and a saviour, by the hand of the angel whom he saw in the thorn-tree.
This man took them out, having done wonders and signs in Egypt and in the Red Sea and in the waste land, for forty years.
This is the same Moses, who said to the children of Israel, God will give you a prophet from among your brothers, like me.
This is the man who was in the church in the waste land with the angel who was talking to him in Sinai, and with our fathers; and to him were given the living words of God, so that he might give them to you.
By whom our fathers would not be controlled; but they put him on one side, turning back in their hearts to Egypt,
And saying to Aaron, Make us gods to go before us: as for this Moses, who took us out of the land of Egypt, we have no idea what has become of him.
And they made the image of a young ox in those days, and made an offering to it, and had joy in the work of their hands.
But God was turned from them and let them give worship to the stars of heaven, as it says in the book of the prophets, Did you make offerings to me of sheep and oxen for forty years in the waste land, O house of Israel?
And you took up the tent of Moloch and the star of the god Rephan, images which you made to give worship to them: and I will take you away, farther than Babylon.
Our fathers had the Tent of witness in the waste land, as God gave orders to Moses to make it after the design which he had seen.
Which our fathers, in their turn, took with them when, with Joshua, they came into the heritage of the nations whom God was driving out before the face of our fathers, till the time of David,
Who was pleasing to God; and he had a desire to make a holy tent for the God of Jacob.
But Solomon was the builder of his house.
But still, the Most High has not his resting-place in houses made with hands, as the prophet says,
Heaven is the seat of my power, and earth is a resting-place for my feet: what sort of house will you make for me, says the Lord, or what is my place of rest?
Did not my hand make all these things?
You whose hearts are hard and whose ears are shut to me; you are ever working against the Holy Spirit; as your fathers did, so do you.
Which of the prophets was not cruelly attacked by your fathers? and they put to death those who gave them the news of the coming of the Upright One; whom you have now given up and put to death;
You, to whom the law was given as it was ordered by angels, and who have not kept it.
Hearing these things, they were cut to the heart and moved with wrath against him.
But he was full of the Holy Spirit, and looking up to heaven, he saw the glory of God and Jesus at the right hand of God.
And he said, Now I see heaven open, and the Son of man at the right hand of God.
But with loud cries, and stopping their ears, they made an attack on him all together,
Driving him out of the town and stoning him: and the witnesses put their clothing at the feet of a young man named Saul.
And Stephen, while he was being stoned, made prayer to God, saying, Lord Jesus, take my spirit.
And going down on his knees, he said in a loud voice, Lord, do not make them responsible for this sin. And when he had said this, he went to his rest.
And Saul gave approval to his death. Now at that time a violent attack was started against the church in Jerusalem; and all but the Apostles went away into all parts of Judaea and Samaria.
And God-fearing men put Stephen's body in its last resting-place, making great weeping over him.
But Saul was burning with hate against the church, going into every house and taking men and women and putting them in prison.
But those who had gone in flight went everywhere preaching the word.
And Philip went down to Samaria and was teaching them about Christ.
And all the people gave attention to the words which Philip said, when they saw the signs which he did.
For unclean spirits came out from those who had them, crying with a loud voice; and a number of those who were ill and broken in body were made well.
And there was much joy in that town.
But there was a certain man named Simon, who in the past had been a wonder-worker and a cause of surprise to the people of Samaria, saying that he himself was a great man:
To whom they all gave attention, from the smallest to the greatest, saying, This man is that power of God which is named Great.
And they gave attention to him, because for a long time his wonder-working powers had kept them under his control.
But when they had faith in the good news given by Philip about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, a number of men and women had baptism.
And Simon himself had faith and, having had baptism, he went with Philip and, seeing the signs and the great wonders which he did, he was full of surprise.
Now when the Apostles at Jerusalem had news that the people of Samaria had taken the word of God into their hearts, they sent to them Peter and John;
Who, when they came there, made prayer for them, that the Holy Spirit might be given to them:
For up to that time he had not come on any of them; only baptism had been given to them in the name of the Lord Jesus.
Then they put their hands on them, and the Holy Spirit came on them.
Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given through the touch of the Apostles' hands, he made them an offering of money, saying,
Give me this power, so that when I put my hands on anyone he may get the Holy Spirit.
But Peter said, May your money come to destruction with you, because you had the idea that what is freely given by God may be got for a price.
You have no part in this business, because your heart is not right before God.
Let your heart be changed, and make prayer to God that you may have forgiveness for your evil thoughts.
For I see that you are prisoned in bitter envy and the chains of sin.
And Simon, answering, said, Make prayer for me to the Lord, so that these things which you have said may not come on me.
So they, having given their witness and made clear the word of the Lord, went back to Jerusalem, giving the good news on their way in a number of the small towns of Samaria.
But an angel of the Lord said to Philip, Get up, and go to the south, to the road which goes from Jerusalem to Gaza, through the waste land.
And he went and there was a man of Ethiopia, a servant of great authority under Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, and controller of all her property, who had come up to Jerusalem for worship;
He was going back, seated in his carriage, and was reading the book of the prophet Isaiah.
And the Spirit said to Philip, Go near, and get on his carriage.
And Philip, running up to him, saw that he was reading Isaiah the prophet, and said to him, Is the sense of what you are reading clear to you?
And he said, How is that possible when I have no guide? And he made Philip get up by his side.
Now the place in the book where he was reading was this: He was taken, like a sheep, to be put to death; and as a lamb is quiet when its wool is being cut, so he made no sound:
Being of low degree, his cause was not given a hearing: who has knowledge of his family? for his life is cut off from the earth.
And the Ethiopian said to Philip, About whom are these words said by the prophet? about himself, or some other?
So Philip, starting from this writing, gave him the good news about Jesus.
And while they were going on their way, they came to some water, and the Ethiopian said, See, here is water; why may I not have baptism?
[]
And he gave orders for the carriage to be stopped, and the two of them went down into the water, and Philip gave him baptism.
And when they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord took Philip away; and the Ethiopian saw him no more, for he went on his way full of joy.
But Philip came to Azotus, and went through all the towns, preaching the good news, till he came to Caesarea.
But Saul, still burning with desire to put to death the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest,
And made a request for letters from him to the Synagogues of Damascus, so that if there were any of the Way there, men or women, he might take them as prisoners to Jerusalem.
And while he was journeying, he came near Damascus; and suddenly he saw a light from heaven shining round him;
And he went down on the earth, and a voice said to him, Saul, Saul, why are you attacking me so cruelly?
And he said, Who are you, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus, whom you are attacking:
But get up, and go into the town, and it will be made clear to you what you have to do.
And the men who were with him were not able to say anything; hearing the voice, but seeing no one.
And Saul got up from the earth, and when his eyes were open, he saw nothing; and he was guided by the hand into Damascus.
And for three days he was not able to see, and he took no food or drink.
Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and the Lord said to him in a vision, Ananias! and he said, Here I am, Lord.
And the Lord said to him, Get up, and go to the street which is named Straight, and make search at the house of Judas for one named Saul of Tarsus: for he is at prayer;
And he has seen a man named Ananias coming in and putting his hands on him, so that he may be able to see.
But Ananias said, Lord, I have had accounts of this man from a number of people, how much evil he has done to your saints at Jerusalem:
And here he has authority from the chief priests to make prisoners all who give worship to your name.
But the Lord said, Go without fear: for he is a special vessel for me, to give to the Gentiles and kings and to the children of Israel the knowledge of my name:
For I will make clear to him what troubles he will have to undergo for me.
And Ananias went out and came to the house, and putting his hands on him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus, whom you saw when you were on your journey, has sent me, so that you may be able to see, and be full of the Holy Spirit.
And straight away it seemed as if a veil was taken from his eyes, and he was able to see; and he got up, and had baptism;
And when he had taken food his strength came back. And for some days he kept with the disciples who were in Damascus.
And straight away, in the Synagogues, he was preaching Jesus as the Son of God.
And all those hearing him were full of wonder and said, Is not this the man who in Jerusalem was attacking all the worshippers of this name? and he had come here so that he might take them as prisoners before the chief priests.
But Saul went on increasing in power, and the Jews in Damascus were not able to give answers to the arguments by which he made it clear that Jesus was the Christ.
Then, after some days, the Jews made an agreement together to put him to death:
But Saul got knowledge of their design. And they kept watch day and night on the roads out of the town, so that they might put him to death:
But his disciples took him by night and let him down from the wall in a basket.
And when he came to Jerusalem, he made an attempt to be joined to the disciples, but they were all in fear of him, not taking him for a disciple.
But Barnabas took him to the Apostles and gave them an account of how he had seen the Lord on the road, and had given hearing to his words, and how at Damascus he had been preaching in the name of Jesus without fear.
And he was with them, going in and out at Jerusalem,
Preaching in the name of the Lord without fear; and he had discussions with the Greek Jews; but they were working for his death.
And when the brothers had knowledge of it, they took him to Caesarea and sent him to Tarsus.
And so the church through all Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace and was made strong; and, living in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, was increased greatly.
And it came about that while Peter was going through all parts of the country he came to the saints who were living at Lydda.
And there was a certain man there, named Aeneas, who for eight years had been in bed, without power of moving.
And Peter said to him, Aeneas, Jesus Christ makes you well: get up and make your bed. And straight away he got up.
And all those living in Lydda and Sharon saw him, and were turned to the Lord.
Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, that is, Dorcas: this woman was given to good works and acts of mercy at all times.
And it came about, in those days, that she got ill and came to her death: and when she had been washed, they put her in a room which was high up.
And because Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, having knowledge that Peter was there, sent two men to him, requesting him to come to them straight away.
And Peter went with them. And when he had come, they took him into the room: and all the widows were there, weeping and putting before him the coats and clothing which Dorcas had made while she was with them.
But Peter made them all go outside, and went down on his knees in prayer; and turning to the body, he said, Tabitha, get up. And, opening her eyes, she saw Peter and got up.
And he took her hand, lifting her up; and, sending for the saints and widows, he gave her to them, living.
And news of it went all through Joppa, and a number of people had faith in the Lord.
And he was living in Joppa for some time with Simon, a leather-worker.
Now there was a certain man in Caesarea, named Cornelius, the captain of the Italian band of the army;
A serious-minded man, fearing God with all his family; he gave much money to the poor, and made prayer to God at all times.
He saw in a vision, clearly, at about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of the Lord coming to him and saying to him, Cornelius!
And he, looking on him in fear, said, What is it, Lord? And he said to him, Your prayers and your offerings have come up to God, and he has kept them in mind.
Now send men to Joppa, and get one Simon, named Peter,
Who is living with Simon, a leather-worker, whose house is by the sea.
And when the angel who said these words to him had gone away, he sent for two of his house-servants, and a God-fearing man of the army, one of those who were waiting on him at all times;
And having given them an account of everything, he sent them to Joppa.
Now the day after, when they were on their journey and were near the town, Peter went up to the top of the house for prayer, about the sixth hour:
And he was in need of food: but while they were getting it ready, a deep sleep came on him;
And he saw the heavens opening, and a vessel coming down, like a great cloth let down on the earth,
In which were all sorts of beasts and birds.
And a voice came to him, saying, Come, Peter; take them for food.
But Peter said, No, Lord; for I have never taken food which is common or unclean.
And the voice came to him a second time, What God has made clean, do not you make common.
And this was done three times: and then the vessel was taken back into heaven.
Now while Peter was in doubt as to the purpose of this vision, the men who were sent by Cornelius, having made search for Simon's house, came to the door,
To see if Simon, named Peter, was living there.
And, while Peter was turning the vision over in his mind, the Spirit said to him, See, three men are looking for you.
Go down, then, and go with them, doubting nothing, for I have sent them.
And Peter went down to the men, and said, I am the man you are looking for: why have you come?
And they said, Cornelius, a captain, an upright and God-fearing man, respected by all the nation of the Jews, had word from God by an angel to send for you to his house, and to give hearing to your words.
So he took them in for the night. And the day after, he went with them, taking some of the brothers from Joppa with him.
And the day after that, they came to Caesarea. And Cornelius was waiting for them, having got together his relations and his near friends.
And when Peter came in, Cornelius came to him and, falling down at his feet, gave him worship.
But Peter, lifting him up, said, Get up, for I am a man as you are.
And saying these words, he went in, and saw that a great number of people had come together;
And he said to them, You yourselves have knowledge that it is against the law for a man who is a Jew to be in the company of one who is of another nation; but God has made it clear to me that no man may be named common or unclean:
And so I came without question, when I was sent for. What then is your purpose in sending for me?
And Cornelius said, Four days from now I was in my house in prayer at the ninth hour; and I saw before me a man in shining clothing,
Who said, Cornelius, your prayer has come to the ears of God, and your offerings are kept in his memory.
Send, then, to Joppa, and get Simon, named Peter, to come to you; he is living in the house of Simon, a leather-worker, by the sea.
So, straight away, I sent for you; and you have done well to come. And now, we are all present before God, ready to give attention to all the things which the Lord has given you to say.
Then Peter said, Truly, I see clearly that God is no respecter of persons:
But in every nation, the man who has fear of him and does righteousness is pleasing to him.
The word which he sent to the children of Israel, giving the good news of peace through Jesus Christ (who is Lord of all) —
That word you yourselves have knowledge of, which was made public through all Judaea, starting from Galilee, after the baptism of which John was the preacher,
About Jesus of Nazareth, how God gave the Holy Spirit to him, with power: and how he went about doing good and making well all who were troubled by evil spirits, for God was with him.
And we are witnesses of all the things which he did in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem; whom they put to death, hanging him on a tree.
On the third day God gave him back to life, and let him be seen,
Not by all the people, but by witnesses marked out before by God, even by us, who took food and drink with him after he came back from the dead.
And he gave us orders to give news of this to the people, and to give public witness that this is he whom God has made judge of the living and the dead.
To him all the prophets give witness, that through his name everyone who has faith in him will have forgiveness of sins.
While Peter was saying these words, the Holy Spirit came on all those who were hearing the word.
And the Jews of the faith, who had come with Peter, were full of wonder, because the Holy Spirit was given to the Gentiles,
And they were talking in tongues, and giving glory to God. Then Peter said,
Will any man say that these may not have baptism who have been given the Holy Spirit as we have?
And he gave orders for them to have baptism in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they kept him with them for some days.
Now the Apostles and the brothers who were in Judaea had news that the word of God had been given to the Gentiles.
And when Peter came to Jerusalem, those who kept the rule of circumcision had an argument with him,
Saying, You went to men without circumcision, and took food with them.
But Peter gave them an account of it all in order, saying to them,
I was in the town of Joppa, at prayer: and falling into a deep sleep, I saw in a vision a vessel like a great cloth let down from heaven, and it came down to me:
And looking on it with attention I saw in it all sorts of beasts and birds.
And a voice came to my ears saying, Come, Peter; take them for food.
But I said, No, Lord; for nothing common or unclean has ever come into my mouth.
But the voice, coming a second time from heaven, said, What God has made clean, do not you make common.
And this was done three times, and they were all taken up again into heaven.
And at that minute, three men, sent from Caesarea, came to the house where we were.
And the Spirit gave me orders to go with them, doubting nothing. And these six brothers came with me; and we went into that man's house:
And he gave us an account of how he had seen the angel in his house, saying, Send to Joppa, and get Simon, named Peter, to come to you;
Who will say words to you through which you and all your family may get salvation.
And, while I was talking to them, the Holy Spirit came on them, as on us at first.
And the words of the Lord came into my mind, how he said, The baptism of John was with water, but you will have baptism with the Holy Spirit.
If then God gave them, when they had faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, the same as he gave to us, who was I to go against God?
And hearing these things they said nothing more, but gave glory to God, saying, Then to the Gentiles as to us has God given a change of heart, so that they may have life.
Then those who had gone away at the time of the trouble about Stephen, went as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus, preaching to the Jews only.
But some of them, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, when they came to Antioch, gave the good news about the Lord Jesus to the Greeks.
And the power of the Lord was with them, and a great number had faith and were turned to the Lord.
And news of them came to the ears of the church at Jerusalem: and they sent Barnabas as far as Antioch:
Who, when he came and saw the grace of God, was glad; and he made clear to them the need of keeping near the Lord with all the strength of their hearts:
For he was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith: and a great number were joined to the Lord.
Then he went on to Tarsus, looking for Saul;
And when he had come across him, he took him to Antioch. And they were with the church there for a year, teaching the people; and the disciples were first given the name of Christians in Antioch.
Now in those days prophets came from Jerusalem to Antioch.
And one of them, named Agabus, said publicly through the Spirit that there would be serious need of food all over the earth: which came about in the time of Claudius.
And the disciples, everyone as he was able, made a decision to send help to the brothers living in Judaea:
Which they did, sending it to the rulers of the church by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.
Now, about that time, Herod the king made cruel attacks on the Christians.
And he put James, the brother of John, to death with the sword.
And when he saw that this was pleasing to the Jews he went on to take Peter in addition. This was at the time of the feast of unleavened bread.
And having taken him, he put him in prison, with four bands of armed men to keep watch over him; his purpose being to take him out to the people after the Passover.
So Peter was kept in prison: but the church made strong prayer to God for him.
And when Herod was about to take him out, the same night Peter was sleeping in chains between two armed men, and the watchmen were keeping watch before the door of the prison.
And a great light was seen shining in the room, and an angel of the Lord came to Peter and, touching him on his side so that he came out of his sleep, said, Get up quickly. And his chains came off his hands.
Then the angel said, Put on your shoes and get ready to go. And he did so. And he said, Put your coat round you and come with me.
And he went out after him; and he was not certain if what was done by the angel was a fact, for it seemed to him that he was seeing a vision.
And when they had gone past the first and second watchmen they came to the iron door into the town, which came open by itself: and they went out and down one street; and then the angel went away.
And when Peter came to his senses he said, Now, truly, I am certain that the Lord has sent his angel and taken me out of the hands of Herod, against all the hopes of the Jews.
And when he became clear about this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John named Mark, where a number of them had come together for prayer.
And he gave a blow on the door, and a young girl came to it, named Rhoda.
And hearing the voice of Peter, in her joy she went running, without opening the door, to say that Peter was outside.
And they said to her, You are off your head. But still she said, with decision, that it was so. And they said, It is his angel.
But Peter went on giving blows on the door: and when it was open and they saw him, they were full of wonder.
But he made a sign to them with his hand to be quiet, and gave them an account of how the Lord had taken him out of prison. And he said, Give the news to James and the brothers. And then he went away.
Now when it was day, the armed men were greatly troubled about what had become of Peter.
And Herod, when he sent for him, and he was not there, after questioning the watchmen, gave orders that they were to be put to death. Then he went down from Judaea to Caesarea for a time.
Now he was very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon: and they came to him, all together, and having made friends with Blastus, the controller of the king's house, they made a request for peace, because their country was dependent on the king's country for its food.
And on the day which had been fixed, Herod, dressed in his robes and seated in his place, made a public statement to them.
And the people, with loud cries, said, It is the voice of a god, not of a man.
And straight away the angel of the Lord sent a disease on him, because he did not give the glory to God: and his flesh was wasted away by worms, and so he came to his end.
But the word of the Lord went on increasing.
And Barnabas and Saul came back from Jerusalem, when their work was ended, taking with them John named Mark.
Now there were at Antioch, in the church there, prophets and teachers, Barnabas, and Symeon who was named Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, a relation of Herod the king, and Saul.
And while they were doing the Lord's work, and going without food, the Holy Spirit said, Let Barnabas and Saul be given to me for the special work for which they have been marked out by me.
Then, after prayer and going without food they put their hands on them, and sent them away.
So, being sent out by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia; and from there they went by ship to Cyprus.
And at Salamis they were preaching the word of God in the Synagogues of the Jews: and John was with them, helping them.
And when they had gone through all the island to Paphos, they came across a certain wonder-worker and false prophet, a Jew whose name was Bar-Jesus;
Who was with the ruler, Sergius Paulus, an able man. This man sent for Barnabas and Saul, desiring to have knowledge of the word of God.
But Elymas, the wonder-worker (for that is the sense of his name), put himself against them, with the purpose of turning the ruler from the faith.
But Saul, whose other name is Paul, being full of the Holy Spirit, looking hard at him, said,
O you, who are full of false tricks and evil ways, a son of the Evil One, hating all righteousness, will you for ever be turning people from the right ways of the Lord?
And now, see, the hand of the Lord is on you, and you will be blind and not able to see the sun for a time. And straight away a dark mist came down on him; and he went about looking for a guide.
Then the ruler, when he saw what was done, had faith, being full of wonder at the teaching of the Lord.
Then Paul and those who were with him went by ship from Paphos and came to Perga in Pamphylia: and there John went away from them and came back to Jerusalem.
But they, going through from Perga, came to Antioch in Pisidia; and they went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath and were seated.
And after the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the Synagogue sent to them, saying, Brothers, if you have a word of comfort for the people, say on.
And Paul, getting up and making a sign with his hand, said, Men of Israel, and you who have the fear of God, give ear.
The God of this people Israel made selection of our fathers, lifting the people up from their low condition when they were living in the land of Egypt, and with a strong arm took them out of it.
And for about forty years he put up with their ways in the waste land.
And having put to destruction seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them the land for their heritage for about four hundred and fifty years.
And after these things he gave them judges, till the time of Samuel the prophet.
Then at their request for a king, God gave them Saul, the son of Kish, a man of the family of Benjamin, who was their king for forty years.
And having put him on one side, he made David their king, to whom he gave witness, saying, I have taken David, the son of Jesse, a man dear to my heart, who will do all my pleasure.
From this man's seed has God given to Israel a Saviour, even Jesus, as he gave his word;
For whose coming John made ready the way by preaching to all the people of Israel the baptism which goes with a change of heart.
And when John was completing his work, he said, What do I seem to you to be? I am not he; but one is coming after me, whose shoes I am not good enough to undo.
My brothers, children of the family of Abraham, and those among you who have the fear of God, to us the word of this salvation is sent.
For the men of Jerusalem and their rulers, having no knowledge of him, or of the sayings of the prophets which come to their ears every Sabbath day, gave effect to them by judging him.
And though no cause of death was seen in him, they made a request to Pilate that he might be put to death.
And when they had done all the things said in the Writings about him, they took him down from the tree, and put him in the place of the dead.
But God gave him back from the dead:
And for a number of days he was seen by those who came with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses before the people.
And we are giving you the good news of the undertaking made to the fathers,
Which God has now put into effect for our children, by sending Jesus; as it says in the second Psalm, You are my Son; this day I have given you being.
And about his coming back from the dead, never again to go to destruction, he has said these words, I will give you the holy and certain mercies of David.
Because he says in another Psalm, You will not let your Holy One see destruction.
Now David, having done God's work for his generation, went to sleep, and was put with his fathers, and his body came to destruction:
But he, who was lifted up by God, did not see destruction.
And so, let it be clear to you, my brothers, that through this man forgiveness of sins is offered to you:
And through him everyone who has faith is made free from all those things, from which the law of Moses was not able to make you free.
So take care that these words of the prophets do not come true for you;
See, you doubters, have wonder and come to your end; for I will do a thing in your days to which you will not give belief, even if it is made clear to you.
And when they went out, they made a request that these words might be said to them again on the Sabbath after.
Now when the meeting was ended, a number of the Jews and of the God-fearing Gentiles who had become Jews, went after Paul and Barnabas: who put before them how important it was to keep on in the grace of God.
And on the Sabbath after, almost all the town came together to give hearing to the word of God.
But when the Jews saw such a great number of people, they were full of envy and said evil words against Paul's preaching.
Then Paul and Barnabas without fear said, It was necessary for the word of God to be given to you first; but because you will have nothing to do with it, and have no desire for eternal life, it will now be offered to the Gentiles.
For so the Lord has given us orders, saying, I have given you for a light to the Gentiles so that you may be for salvation to the ends of the earth.
And the Gentiles, hearing this, were glad and gave glory to the word of God: and those marked out by God for eternal life had faith.
And the word of the Lord went through all the country.
But the Jews, working up the feelings of the God-fearing women of high position and of the chief men of the town, got an attack started against Paul and Barnabas, driving them out of those parts.
But they, shaking off the dust of that place from their feet, came to Iconium.
And the disciples were full of joy and of the Holy Spirit.
Now in Iconium they went together to the Synagogue of the Jews and gave such teaching that a great number of Jews and Greeks had faith.
But those Jews who had not the faith, made the minds of the Gentiles bitter against the brothers.
So they kept there for a long time, taking heart in the Lord, who gave witness to the word of his grace by causing signs and wonders to be done by their hands.
But there was a division among the people of the town; some were on the side of the Jews and some on the side of the Apostles.
And when a violent attempt was made by the Gentiles and the Jews, with their rulers, to make an attack on them and have them stoned,
Having got news of it, they went in flight to the towns of Lycaonia, Lystra, and Derbe, and the country round about:
And went on preaching the good news there.
And at Lystra there was a certain man, who from birth had been without the use of his feet, never having had the power of walking.
This man was giving ear to the preaching of Paul, who, looking at him, and seeing that he had faith to be made well,
Said in a loud voice, Get up on your feet. And, jumping up, he went walking about.
And when the people saw what Paul had done, they said in a loud voice, in the language of Lycaonia, The gods have come down to us in the form of men.
And they gave the name of Jupiter to Barnabas, and to Paul that of Mercury, because he was the chief talker.
And the priest of the image of Jupiter, which was before the town, took oxen and flowers to the doors of the town, and was about to make an offering with the people.
But when this came to the ears of the Apostles, Paul and Barnabas, they went running out among the people, parting their clothing, and crying out,
Good people, why are you doing these things? We are men with the same feelings as you, and we give you the good news so that you may be turned away from these foolish things to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all things in them:
Who in the past let all nations go in the ways which seemed good to them.
But he was not without witness, because he did good, and gave you rain from heaven and times of fruit, making your hearts full of food and joy.
And even with these words, it was hard for them to keep the people from making an offering to them.
But some Jews came to that place from Antioch and Iconium, and got control over the people; and after stoning Paul, they had him pulled out of the town, taking him for dead.
But when the disciples came round him, he got up and went into the town: and the day after he went away with Barnabas to Derbe.
And having made a number of disciples through the preaching of the good news in that town, they went back to Lystra and Iconium and Antioch,
Making strong the souls of the disciples, saying to them that they were to keep the faith, and that we have to go through troubles of all sorts to come into the kingdom of God.
And when they had made selection of some to be rulers in every church, and had given themselves to prayer and kept themselves from food, they put them into the care of the Lord in whom they had faith.
And they went through Pisidia and came to Pamphylia.
And, after preaching the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia;
And from there they went by ship to Antioch, where they had been handed over to the grace of God for the work which they had not done.
And when they came there, and had got the church together, they gave them an account of all the things which God had done through them, and how he had made open a door of faith to the Gentiles.
And they were with the disciples there for a long time.
Now certain men came down from Judaea, teaching the brothers and saying that without circumcision, after the rule of Moses, there is no salvation.
And after Paul and Barnabas had had no little argument and discussion with them, the brothers made a decision to send Paul and Barnabas and certain others of them to the Apostles and the rulers of the church at Jerusalem about this question.
So they, being sent on their way by the church, went through Phoenicia and Samaria, giving news of the salvation of the Gentiles, to the great joy of all the brothers.
And when they came to Jerusalem, they had a meeting with the church and the Apostles and the rulers, and they gave an account of all the things which God had done through them.
But some of the Pharisees, who were of the faith, got up and said, It is necessary for these to have circumcision and to keep the law of Moses.
And the Apostles and the rulers of the church came together and gave thought to the question.
And when there had been much discussion, Peter got up and said to them, My brothers, you have knowledge that some time back it was God's pleasure that by my mouth the good news might be given to the Gentiles so that they might have faith.
And God, the searcher of hearts, was a witness to them, giving them the Holy Spirit even as he did to us;
Making no division between them and us, but making clean their hearts by faith.
Why then are you testing God, by putting on the neck of the disciples a yoke so hard that not even our fathers or we were strong enough for it?
But we have faith that we will get salvation through the grace of the Lord Jesus in the same way as they.
And all the people were quiet while Barnabas and Paul gave an account of the signs and wonders which God had done among the Gentiles by them.
And when they had come to an end, James, answering, said, My brothers, give ear to me:
Symeon has given an account of how God was first pleased to take from among the Gentiles a people for himself.
And this is in agreement with the words of the prophets, as it is said,
After these things I will come back, and will put up the tent of David which has been broken down, building up again its broken parts and making it complete:
So that the rest of men may make search for the Lord, and all the Gentiles on whom my name is named,
Says the Lord, who has made these things clear from the earliest times.
For this reason my decision is, that we do not put trouble in the way of those who from among the Gentiles are turned to God;
But that we give them orders to keep themselves from things offered to false gods, and from the evil desires of the body, and from the flesh of animals put to death in ways against the law, and from blood.
For Moses, from times long past, has his preachers in every town, reading his law in the Synagogues every Sabbath.
Then it seemed good to the Apostles and the rulers and all the church, to send men from among them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas; Judas, named Barsabbas, and Silas, chief men among the brothers:
And they sent a letter by them, saying, The Apostles and the older brothers, to the brothers who are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, may joy be with you:
Because we have knowledge that some who went from us have been troubling you with their words, putting your souls in doubt; to whom we gave no such order;
It seemed good to us, having come to an agreement together, to send these men to you, with our well loved Barnabas and Paul,
Men who have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And so we have sent Judas and Silas, who will say the same things to you themselves, by word of mouth.
For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us, to put on you nothing more than these necessary things;
To keep from things offered to false gods, and from blood, and from things put to death in ways which are against the law, and from the evil desires of the body; if you keep yourselves from these, you will do well. May you be happy.
So they, being sent away, came down to Antioch, and having got the people together, they gave them the letter.
And after reading it, they were glad of its comfort.
And Judas and Silas, who themselves were prophets, gave teaching to the brothers and made them strong in the faith.
And when they had been there for some time, they were sent back in peace by the brothers to those who had sent them.
[]
But Paul and Barnabas kept on in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of God, with a number of others.
And after some days, Paul said to Barnabas, Let us go back and see the brothers in every town where we have given the word of God, and see how they are.
And Barnabas had a desire to take with them John, named Mark.
But Paul was of the opinion that it was not right to take with them one who had gone away from them in Pamphylia, and had not gone on with the work.
And there was a sharp argument between them, so that they were parted from one another, and Barnabas took Mark with him and went by ship to Cyprus;
But Paul took Silas and went away with the blessing of the brothers.
And he went through Syria and Cilicia, making the churches stronger in the faith.
And he came to Derbe and Lystra: and there was a certain disciple there named Timothy, whose mother was one of the Jews of the faith, but his father was a Greek;
Of whom the brothers at Lystra and Iconium had a high opinion.
Paul had a desire for him to go with him, and he gave him circumcision because of the Jews who were in those parts: for they all had knowledge that his father was a Greek.
And on their way through the towns, they gave them the rules which had been made by the Apostles and the rulers of the church at Jerusalem, so that they might keep them.
So the churches were made strong in the faith and were increased in number every day.
And after they had gone through the land of Phrygia and Galatia, the Holy Spirit did not let them take the word into Asia;
And having come to Mysia, they made an attempt to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not let them;
And going past Mysia, they came down to Troas.
And Paul had a vision in the night; a man of Macedonia came, requesting him, and saying, Come over into Macedonia and give us help.
And when he had seen the vision, straight away we made the decision to go into Macedonia, for it seemed certain to us that God had sent us to give the good news to them.
So, from Troas we went straight by ship to Samothrace and the day after to Neapolis;
And from there to Philippi, which is the most important town of Macedonia and a Roman colony: and we were there for some days.
And on the Sabbath we went outside the town, by the river, where we had an idea that there would be a place of prayer; and, being seated, we had talk with the women who had come together.
And a certain woman named Lydia, a trader in purple cloth of the town of Thyatira, and a God-fearing woman, gave ear to us: whose heart the Lord made open to give attention to the things which Paul was saying.
And when she and her family had had baptism, she made a request to us, saying, If it seems to you that I am true to the Lord, come into my house and be my guests. And she made us come.
And when we were going to the place of prayer, we came across a girl with a spirit which gave knowledge of the future, whose masters made great profit from her power.
She came after Paul and us, crying out and saying, These men are the servants of the Most High God, who are giving you news of the way of salvation.
And this she did on a number of days. But Paul was greatly troubled and, turning, said to the spirit, I give you orders in the name of Jesus Christ, to come out of her. And it came out that very hour.
But when her masters saw that their hope of profit was gone, they took Paul and Silas, pulling them into the market-place before the rulers;
And when they had taken them before the authorities, they said, These men, who are Jews, are greatly troubling our town;
Teaching rules of living which it is not right for us to have or to keep, being Romans.
And the people made an attack on them all together: and the authorities took their clothing off them, and gave orders for them to be whipped.
And when they had given them a great number of blows, they put them in prison, giving orders to the keeper of the prison to keep them safely:
And he, having such orders, put them into the inner prison with chains on their feet.
But about the middle of the night, Paul and Silas were making prayers and songs to God in the hearing of the prisoners;
And suddenly there was an earth-shock, so that the base of the prison was moved: and all the doors came open, and everyone's chains came off.
And the keeper, coming out of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, took his sword and was about to put himself to death, fearing that the prisoners had got away.
But Paul said in a loud voice, Do yourself no damage, for we are all here.
And he sent for lights and came rushing in and, shaking with fear, went down on his face before Paul and Silas,
And took them out and said, Sirs, what have I to do to get salvation?
And they said, Have faith in the Lord Jesus, and you and your family will have salvation.
And they gave the word of the Lord to him and to all who were in his house.
And that same hour of the night, he took them, and when he had given attention to their wounds, he and all his family had baptism straight away.
And he took them into his house and gave them food, and he was full of joy, having faith in God with all his family.
But when it was day, the authorities sent the police, saying, Let these men go.
And the keeper said to Paul, The authorities have given orders to let you go: come out now, and go in peace.
But Paul said to them, They have given us who are Romans a public whipping without judging us, and have put us in prison. Will they now send us out secretly? no, truly, let them come themselves and take us out.
And the police gave an account of these words to the authorities, and they were full of fear on hearing that they were Romans;
Then they came and made prayers to them, requesting them, when they had taken them out, to go away from the town.
And they came out of the prison and went to the house of Lydia: and when they had seen the brothers they gave them comfort and went away.
Now when they had gone through Amphipolis and Apollonia they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Synagogue of the Jews:
And Paul, as he generally did, went in to them, and on three Sabbath days had discussions with them from the holy Writings,
Saying to them clearly and openly that Christ had to be put to death and come back to life again; and that this Jesus, whom, he said, I am preaching to you, is the Christ.
And some of them had faith, and were joined to Paul and Silas; and a number of the God-fearing Greeks, and some of the chief women.
But the Jews, being moved with envy, took with them certain low persons from among the common people, and getting together a great number of people, made an outcry in the town, attacking the house of Jason with the purpose of taking them out to the people.
And when they were not able to get them, they took Jason and some of the brothers by force before the rulers of the town, crying, These men, who have made trouble all over the world have now come here;
Whom Jason has taken into his house: and they are acting against the orders of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus.
And hearing these things the people and the rulers of the town were troubled.
And having made Jason and the others give an undertaking to keep the peace, they let them go.
And the brothers straight away sent Paul and Silas away by night to Beroea: and they, when they came there, went to the Synagogue of the Jews.
Now these were more noble than the Jews of Thessalonica, for they gave serious attention to the word, searching in the holy Writings every day, to see if these things were so.
And a number of them had faith, and no small number of the Greek women of high position and of the men.
But when the Jews of Thessalonica had news that Paul was preaching the word at Beroea, they came there, troubling the people and working them up.
So the brothers sent Paul straight away to the sea: but Silas and Timothy kept there still.
But those who went with Paul took him as far as Athens, and then went away, with orders from him to Silas and Timothy to come to him quickly.
Now while Paul was waiting for them at Athens, his spirit was troubled, for he saw all the town full of images of the gods.
So he had discussions in the Synagogue with the Jews and God-fearing Gentiles, and every day in the market-place with those who were there.
And some of those who were supporters of the theories of the Epicureans and the Stoics, had a meeting with him. And some said, What is this talker of foolish words saying? And others, He seems to be a preacher of strange gods: because he was preaching of Jesus and his coming back from the dead.
And they took him to Mars' Hill, saying, Will you make clear to us what is this new teaching of yours?
For you seem to us to say strange things, and we have a desire to get the sense of them.
(Now all the Athenians and the men from other lands who come there were giving all their time to talking or hearing of anything new.)
And Paul got to his feet on Mars' Hill and said, O men of Athens, I see that you are overmuch given to fear of the gods.
For when I came by, I was looking at the things to which you give worship, and I saw an altar with this writing on it, TO THE GOD OF WHOM THERE IS NO KNOWLEDGE. Now, what you, without knowledge, give worship to, I make clear to you.
The God who made the earth and everything in it, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, is not housed in buildings made with hands;
And he is not dependent on the work of men's hands, as if he had need of anything, for he himself gives to all life and breath and all things;
And he has made of one blood all the nations of men living on all the face of the earth, ordering their times and the limits of their lands,
So that they might make search for God, in order, if possible, to get knowledge of him and make discovery of him, though he is not far from every one of us:
For in him we have life and motion and existence; as certain of your verse writers have said, For we are his offspring.
If then we are the offspring of God, it is not right for us to have the idea that God is like gold or silver or stone, formed by the art or design of man.
Those times when men had no knowledge were overlooked by God; but now he gives orders to all men in every place to undergo a change of heart:
Because a day has been fixed in which all the world will be judged in righteousness by the man who has been marked out by him for this work; of which he has given a sign to all men by giving him back from the dead.
Now on hearing about the coming back from death, some of them made sport of it, but others said, Let us go more fully into this another time.
And so Paul went away from among them.
But some men gave him their support: among whom was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
After these things, he went away from Athens, and came to Corinth.
And there he came across a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of Pontus by birth, who not long before had come from Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had given orders that all Jews were to go away from Rome: and he came to them;
And because he was of the same trade, he was living with them, and they did their work together; for by trade they were tent-makers.
And every Sabbath he had discussions in the Synagogue, turning Jews and Greeks to the faith.
And when Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was completely given up to the word, preaching to the Jews that the Christ was Jesus.
And when they put themselves against him, and said evil words, he said, shaking his clothing, Your blood be on your heads, I am clean: from now I will go to the Gentiles.
And moving from there, he went into the house of a man named Titus Justus, a God-fearing man, whose house was very near the Synagogue.
And Crispus, the ruler of the Synagogue, with all his family, had faith in the Lord; and a great number of the people of Corinth, hearing the word, had faith and were given baptism.
And the Lord said to Paul in the night, in a vision, Have no fear and go on preaching:
For I am with you, and no one will make an attack on you to do you damage: for I have a number of people in this town.
And he was there for a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
But when Gallio was ruler of Achaia, all the Jews together made an attack on Paul, and took him to the judge's seat,
Saying, This man is teaching the people to give worship to God in a way which is against the law.
But when Paul was about to say something, Gallio said to the Jews, If this was anything to do with wrongdoing or crime, there would be a reason for me to give you a hearing:
But if it is a question of words or names or of your law, see to it yourselves; I will not be a judge of such things.
And he sent them away from the judge's seat.
And they all made an attack on Sosthenes, the ruler of the Synagogue, and gave him blows before the judge's seat; but Gallio gave no attention to these things.
And Paul, after waiting some days, went away from the brothers and went by ship to Syria, Priscilla and Aquila being with him; and he had had his hair cut off in Cenchrea, for he had taken an oath.
And they came down to Ephesus and he left them there: and he himself went into the Synagogue and had a discussion with the Jews.
And being requested by them to be there for a longer time, he said, No;
And went from them, saying, I will come back to you if God lets me; and he took ship from Ephesus.
And when he had come to land at Caesarea, he went to see the church, and then went down to Antioch.
And having been there for some time, he went through the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, making the disciples strong in the faith.
Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by birth, and a man of learning, came to Ephesus; and he had great knowledge of the holy Writings.
This man had been trained in the way of the Lord; and burning in spirit, he gave himself up to teaching the facts about Jesus, though he had knowledge only of John's baptism:
And he was preaching in the Synagogue without fear. But Priscilla and Aquila, hearing his words, took him in, and gave him fuller teaching about the way of God.
And when he had a desire to go over into Achaia, the brothers gave him help, and sent letters to the disciples requesting them to take him in among them: and when he had come, he gave much help to those who had faith through grace:
For he overcame the Jews in public discussion, making clear from the holy Writings that the Christ was Jesus.
And it came about that while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, having gone through the higher country, came to Ephesus, where there were certain disciples:
And he said to them, Did you get the Holy Spirit when you had faith? And they said to him, No, we have had no knowledge of the Holy Spirit.
And he said, What sort of baptism did you have? And they said, The baptism of John.
And Paul said, John gave a baptism which goes with a change of heart, saying to the people that they were to have faith in him who was coming after him, that is, in Jesus.
And hearing this, they had baptism in the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when Paul had put his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them; and they had the power of talking in tongues, and acting like prophets.
And there were about twelve of these men.
And he went into the Synagogue, and for three months he was preaching there without fear, reasoning and teaching about the kingdom of God.
But because some of the people were hard-hearted and would not give hearing, saying evil words about the Way before the people, he went away from them, and kept the disciples separate, reasoning every day in the school of Tyrannus.
And this went on for two years, so that all those who were living in Asia had knowledge of the word of the Lord, Greeks as well as Jews.
And God did special works of power by the hands of Paul:
So that bits of linen and clothing from his body were taken to people who were ill, and their diseases went away from them and the evil spirits went out.
But some of the Jews who went from place to place driving out evil spirits, took it on themselves to make use of the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had evil spirits, saying, I give you orders, by Jesus, whom Paul is preaching.
And there were seven sons of a man named Sceva, a Jew and a chief priest, who did this.
And the evil spirit, answering, said to them, I have knowledge of Jesus, and of Paul, but who are you?
And the man in whom the evil spirit was, jumping on them, was stronger than the two of them, and overcame them, so that they went running from that house, wounded and without their clothing.
And this came to the ears of all those, Jews and Greeks, who were living at Ephesus; and fear came on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was made great.
And a number of those who had faith came and made a public statement of their sins and all their acts.
And a great number of those who were experts in strange arts took their books and put them on the fire in front of everyone: and when the books were valued they came to fifty thousand bits of silver.
So the word of the Lord was increased very greatly and was full of power.
Now after these things were ended, Paul came to a decision that when he had gone through Macedonia and Achaia he would go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I have a desire to see Rome.
And having sent two of his helpers, Timothy and Erastus, into Macedonia, he himself went on living in Asia for a time.
And about that time a great outcry took place about the Way.
For there was a certain man named Demetrius, a silver-worker, who made silver boxes for the images of Diana, and gave no small profit to the workmen;
Whom he got together, with other workmen of the same trade, and said to them, Men, it is clear that from this business we get our wealth.
And you see, for it has come to your ears, that not only at Ephesus, but almost all through Asia, this Paul has been teaching numbers of people and turning them away, saying that those are not gods who are made by men's hands:
And there is danger, not only that our trade may be damaged in the opinion of men, but that the holy place of the great goddess Diana may be no longer honoured, and that she to whom all Asia and the world give worship, will be put down from her high position.
And hearing this, they were very angry, crying out and saying, Great is Diana of Ephesus.
And the town was full of noise and trouble, and they all came running into the theatre, having taken by force Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia who were journeying in company with Paul.
And when Paul was about to go in to the people, the disciples did not let him.
And some of the rulers of Asia, being his friends, sent to him, requesting him seriously not to put himself in danger by going into the theatre.
And some said one thing, and some another: for there was no order in the meeting; and most of them had no idea why they had come together.
Then they took Alexander out from among the people, the Jews putting him forward. And Alexander, making a sign with his hand, was about to make a statement to the people in answer:
But when they saw that he was a Jew, all of them with one voice went on crying out for about two hours, Great is Diana of Ephesus.
And when the chief secretary had got the people quiet, he said, Men of Ephesus, is any man without knowledge that the town of Ephesus is the keeper of the holy place of the great Diana, who was sent down from Jupiter?
So then, because these things may not be doubted, it would be better for you to be quiet, and do nothing unwise.
For you have taken these men, who are not doing damage to the holy place or talking against our goddess.
If, then, Demetrius and the workmen who are with him have a protest to make against any man, the law is open to them, and there are judges; let them put up a cause at law against one another.
But if any other business is in question, let it be taken up in the regular meeting.
For, truly, we are in danger of being made responsible for this day's trouble, there being no cause for it: and we are not able to give any reason for this coming together.
And after the noise had come to an end, Paul, having sent for the disciples and given them comfort, went away from them to Macedonia.
And when he had gone through those parts and given them much teaching, he came into Greece.
And when he had been there three months, because the Jews had made a secret design against him when he was about to take ship for Syria, he made a decision to go back through Macedonia.
And Sopater of Beroea, the son of Pyrrhus, and Aristarchus and Secundus of Thessalonica, and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy, and Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia, went with him as far as Asia.
But these had gone before, and were waiting for us at Troas.
And we went away from Philippi by ship after the days of unleavened bread, and came to them at Troas in five days; and we were there for seven days.
And on the first day of the week, when we had come together for the holy meal, Paul gave them a talk, for it was his purpose to go away on the day after; and he went on talking till after the middle of the night.
And there were a number of lights in the room where we had come together.
And a certain young man named Eutychus, who was seated in the window, went into a deep sleep; and while Paul went on talking, being overcome by sleep, he had a fall from the third floor, and was taken up dead.
And Paul went down and, falling on him, took him in his arms and said, Do not be troubled, for his life is in him.
And when he had gone up, and had taken the broken bread, he went on talking to them for a long time, even till dawn, and then he went away.
And they took the boy in, living, and were greatly comforted.
But we, going before him by ship, went to Assos with the purpose of taking Paul in there: for so he had given orders, because he himself was coming by land.
And when he came up with us at Assos, we took him in the ship and went on to Mitylene.
And going from there by sea, we came on the day after opposite Chios, and touching at Samos on the day after that, we came on the third day to Miletus.
For Paul's purpose was to go past Ephesus, so that he might not be kept in Asia; for he was going quickly, in order, if possible, to be at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.
And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus for the rulers of the church.
And when they had come, he said to them, You yourselves have seen what my life has been like all the time from the day when I first came into Asia,
Doing the Lord's work without pride, through all the sorrow and troubles which came on me because of the evil designs of the Jews:
And how I kept back nothing which might be of profit to you, teaching you publicly and privately,
Preaching to Jews and to Greeks the need for a turning of the heart to God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
And now, as you see, I am going to Jerusalem, a prisoner in spirit, having no knowledge of what will come to me there:
Only that the Holy Spirit makes clear to me in every town that prison and pains are waiting for me.
But I put no value on my life, if only at the end of it I may see the work complete which was given to me by the Lord Jesus, to be a witness of the good news of the grace of God.
And now I am conscious that you, among whom I have gone about preaching the kingdom, will not see my face again.
And so I say to you this day that I am clean from the blood of all men.
For I have not kept back from you anything of the purpose of God.
Give attention to yourselves, and to all the flock which the Holy Spirit has given into your care, to give food to the church of God, for which he gave his blood.
I am conscious that after I am gone, evil wolves will come in among you, doing damage to the flock;
And from among yourselves will come men who will give wrong teaching, turning away the disciples after them.
So keep watch, having in mind that for three years without resting I was teaching every one of you, day and night, with weeping.
And now, I give you into the care of God and the word of his grace, which is able to make you strong and to give you your heritage among all the saints.
I have had no desire for any man's silver or gold or clothing.
You yourselves have seen that with these hands I got what was necessary for me and those who were with me.
In all things I was an example to you of how, in your lives, you are to give help to the feeble, and keep in memory the words of the Lord Jesus, how he himself said, There is a greater blessing in giving than in getting.
And having said these words, he went down on his knees in prayer with them all.
And they were all weeping, falling on Paul's neck and kissing him,
Being sad most of all because he had said that they would not see his face again. And so they went with him to the ship.
And after parting from them, we put out to sea and came straight to Cos, and the day after to Rhodes, and from there to Patara:
And as there was a ship going to Phoenicia, we went in it.
And when we had come in view of Cyprus, going past it on our left, we went on to Syria, and came to land at Tyre: for there the goods which were in the ship had to be taken out.
And meeting the disciples we were there for seven days: and they gave Paul orders through the Spirit not to go up to Jerusalem.
And when these days came to an end, we went on our journey; and they all, with their wives and children, came with us on our way till we were out of the town: and after going on our knees in prayer by the sea,
We said our last words to one another, and got into the ship, and they went back to their houses.
And journeying by ship from Tyre we came to Ptolemais; and there we had talk with the brothers and were with them for one day.
And on the day after, we went away and came to Caesarea, where we were guests in the house of Philip, the preacher, who was one of the seven.
And he had four daughters, virgins, who were prophets.
And while we were waiting there for some days, a certain prophet, named Agabus, came down from Judaea.
And he came to us, and took the band of Paul's clothing, and putting it round his feet and hands, said, The Holy Spirit says these words, So will the Jews do to the man who is the owner of this band, and they will give him up into the hands of the Gentiles.
And hearing these things, we and those who were living in that place made request to him not to go to Jerusalem.
Then Paul said, What are you doing, weeping and wounding my heart? for I am ready, not only to be a prisoner, but to be put to death at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.
And as he might not be moved we did no more, saying, Let the purpose of God be done.
And after these days we got ready and went up to Jerusalem.
And some of the disciples from Caesarea went with us, taking a certain Mnason of Cyprus, one of the early disciples, in whose house we were to be living.
And when we came to Jerusalem, the brothers were pleased to see us.
And on the day after, Paul went with us to James, and all the rulers of the church were present.
And when he had said how glad he was to see them, he gave them a detailed account of the things which God had done through his work among the Gentiles.
And hearing it, they gave praise to God; and they said to him, You see, brother, what thousands there are among the Jews, who have the faith; and they all have a great respect for the law:
And they have had news of you, how you have been teaching all the Jews among the Gentiles to give up the law of Moses, and not to give circumcision to their children, and not to keep the old rules.
What then is the position? They will certainly get news that you have come.
Do this, then, which we say to you: We have four men who have taken an oath;
Go with these, and make yourself clean with them, and make the necessary payments for them, so that they may be free from their oath: and everyone will see that the statements made about you are not true, but that you put yourself under rule, and keep the law.
But as to the Gentiles who have the faith, we sent a letter, giving our decision that they were to keep themselves from offerings made to false gods, and from blood, and from the flesh of animals put to death in ways against the law, and from the evil desires of the body.
Then Paul took the men, and on the day after, making himself clean with them, he went into the Temple, giving out the statement that the days necessary for making them clean were complete, till the offering was made for every one of them.
And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews from Asia, seeing him in the Temple, got the people together and put their hands on him,
Crying out, Men of Israel, come to our help: this is the man who is teaching all men everywhere against the people and the law and this place: and in addition, he has taken Greeks into the Temple, and made this holy place unclean.
For they had seen him before in the town with Trophimus of Ephesus, and had the idea that Paul had taken him with him into the Temple.
And all the town was moved, and the people came running together and put their hands on Paul, pulling him out of the Temple: and then the doors were shut.
And while they were attempting to put him to death, news came to the chief captain of the band that all Jerusalem was out of control.
And straight away he took some armed men and went quickly down to them: and the Jews, seeing them, gave no more blows to Paul.
Then the chief captain came near and took him, and gave orders for him to be put in chains, questioning them as to who he was and what he had done.
And some said one thing and some another, among the people: and as he was not able to get a knowledge of the facts because of the noise, he gave orders for Paul to be taken into the army building.
And when he came on to the steps, he was lifted up by the armed men, because of the force of the people;
For a great mass of people came after them, crying out, Away with him!
And when Paul was about to be taken into the building, he said to the chief captain, May I say something to you? And he said, Have you a knowledge of Greek?
Are you by chance the Egyptian who, before this, got the people worked up against the government and took four thousand men of the Assassins out into the waste land?
But Paul said, I am a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia, which is not an unimportant town: I make a request to you to let me say a word to the people.
And when he let him do so, Paul, from the steps, made a sign with his hand to the people, and when they were all quiet, he said to them in the Hebrew language,
My brothers and fathers, give ear to the story of my life which I now put before you.
And, hearing him talking in the Hebrew language, they became the more quiet, and he said,
I am a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia by birth, but I had my education in this town at the feet of Gamaliel, being trained in the keeping of every detail of the law of our fathers; given up to the cause of God with all my heart, as you are today.
And I made attacks on this Way, even to death, taking men and women and putting them in prison.
Of which the high priest will be a witness, and all the rulers, from whom I had letters to the brothers; and I went into Damascus, to take those who were there as prisoners to Jerusalem for punishment.
And it came about that while I was on my journey, coming near to Damascus, about the middle of the day, suddenly I saw a great light from heaven shining round me.
And when I went down on the earth, a voice came to my ears saying to me, Saul, Saul, why are you attacking me so cruelly?
And I, answering, said, Who are you; Lord? And he said to me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you are attacking.
And those who were with me saw the light, but the voice of him who was talking to me came not to their ears.
And I said, What have I to do, Lord? And the Lord said to me, Get up, and go into Damascus; and it will be made clear to you what you have to do.
And because I was unable to see because of the glory of that light, those who were with me took me by the hand, and so I came to Damascus.
And one Ananias, a God-fearing man, who kept the law, and of whom all the Jews in that place had a high opinion,
Came to my side and said, Brother Saul, let your eyes be open. And in that very hour I was able to see him.
And he said, You have been marked out by the God of our fathers to have knowledge of his purpose, and to see the Upright One and to give ear to the words of his mouth.
For you will be a witness for him to all men of what you have seen and of what has come to your ears.
And now, why are you waiting? get up, and have baptism, for the washing away of your sins, giving worship to his name.
And it came about that when I had come back to Jerusalem, while I was at prayer in the Temple, my senses became more than naturally clear,
And I saw him saying to me, Go out of Jerusalem straight away because they will not give hearing to your witness about me.
And I said, Lord, they themselves have knowledge that I went through the Synagogues putting in prison and whipping all those who had faith in you:
And when Stephen your witness was put to death, I was there, giving approval, and looking after the clothing of those who put him to death.
And he said to me, Go, for I will send you far away to the Gentiles.
And they gave him a hearing as far as this word; then with loud voices they said, Away with this man from the earth; it is not right for him to be living.
And while they were crying out, and pulling off their clothing, and sending dust into the air,
The chief captain gave orders for him to be taken into the army building, saying that he would put him to the test by whipping, so that he might have knowledge of the reason why they were crying out so violently against him.
And when they had put leather bands round him, Paul said to the captain who was present, Is it the law for you to give blows to a man who is a Roman and has not been judged?
And hearing this, the man went to the chief captain and gave him an account of it, saying, What are you about to do? for this man is a Roman.
And the chief captain came to him and said, Give me an answer, are you a Roman? And he said, Yes.
And the chief captain said, I got Roman rights for myself at a great price. And Paul said, But I had them by birth.
Then those who were about to put him to the test went away: and the chief captain was in fear, seeing that he was a Roman, and that he had put chains on him.
But on the day after, desiring to have certain knowledge of what the Jews had to say against him, he made him free, and gave orders for the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin to come together, and he took Paul and put him before them.
And Paul, looking fixedly at the Sanhedrin, said, My brothers, my life has been upright before God till this day.
And the high priest, Ananias, gave orders to those who were near him to give him a blow on the mouth.
Then Paul said to him, God will give blows to you, you whitewashed wall: are you here to be my judge by law, and by your orders am I given blows against the law?
And those who were near said, Do you say such words against God's high priest?
And Paul said, Brother, I had no idea that he was the high priest: for it has been said, You may not say evil about the ruler of your people.
But when Paul saw that half of them were Sadducees and the rest Pharisees, he said in the Sanhedrin, Brothers, I am a Pharisee, and the son of Pharisees: I am here to be judged on the question of the hope of the coming back from the dead.
And when he had said this, there was an argument between the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and a division in the meeting.
For the Sadducees say that there is no coming back from the dead, and no angels or spirits: but the Pharisees have belief in all these.
And there was a great outcry: and some of the scribes on the side of the Pharisees got up and took part in the discussion, saying, We see no evil in this man: what if he has had a revelation from an angel or a spirit?
And when the argument became very violent, the chief captain, fearing that Paul would be pulled in two by them, gave orders to the armed men to take him by force from among them, and take him into the army building.
And the night after, the Lord came to his side and said, Be of good heart, for as you have been witnessing for me in Jerusalem, so will you be my witness in Rome.
And when it was day, the Jews came together and put themselves under an oath that they would take no food or drink till they had put Paul to death.
And more than forty of them took this oath.
And they came to the chief priests and the rulers and said, We have taken a great oath to take no food till we have put Paul to death
So now, will you and the Sanhedrin make a request to the military authorities to have him sent down to you, as if you were desiring to go into the business in greater detail; and we, before ever he gets to you, will be waiting to put him to death.
But Paul's sister's son had word of their design, and he came into the army building and gave news of it to Paul.
And Paul sent for a captain and said, Take this young man to your chief, for he has news for him.
So he took him to the chief captain and said, Paul, the prisoner, made a request to me to take this young man to you, for he has something to say to you.
And the chief took him by the hand and, going on one side, said to him privately, What is it you have to say to me?
And he said, The Jews are in agreement together to make a request to you for Paul to be taken, on the day after this, into the Sanhedrin, to be questioned in greater detail.
But do not give way to them, for more than forty of them are waiting for him, having taken an oath not to take food or drink till they have put him to death: and now they are ready, waiting for your order.
So the chief captain let the young man go, saying to him, Do not say to anyone that you have given me word of these things.
And he sent for two captains and said, Make ready two hundred men, with seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen, to go to Caesarea, at the third hour of the night:
And get beasts so that they may put Paul on them, and take him safely to Felix, the ruler.
And he sent a letter in these words:
Claudius Lysias, to the most noble ruler, Felix, peace be with you.
This man was taken by the Jews, and was about to be put to death by them, when I came on them with the army and took him out of danger, having knowledge that he was a Roman.
And, desiring to get at the reason for their attack on him, I took him down to their Sanhedrin:
Then it became clear to me that it was a question of their law, and that nothing was said against him which might be a reason for prison or death.
And when news was given to me that a secret design was being made against the man, I sent him straight away to you, giving orders to those who are against him to make their statements before you.
So the armed men, as they were ordered, took Paul and came by night to Antipatris.
But on the day after, they sent the horsemen on with him, and went back to their place:
And they, when they came to Caesarea, gave the letter to the ruler, and took Paul before him.
And after reading it, he said, What part of the country do you come from? And, hearing that he was from Cilicia,
I will give hearing to your cause, he said, when those who are against you have come. And he gave orders for him to be kept in Herod's Praetorium.
And after five days, the high priest, Ananias, came with certain of the rulers, and an expert talker, one Tertullus; and they made a statement to Felix against Paul.
And when he had been sent for, Tertullus, starting his statement, said, Because by you we are living in peace, and through your wisdom wrongs are put right for this nation,
In all things and in all places we are conscious of our great debt to you, most noble Felix.
But, so that I may not make you tired, I make a request to you of your mercy, to give hearing to a short statement.
For this man, in our opinion, is a cause of trouble, a maker of attacks on the government among Jews through all the empire, and a chief mover in the society of the Nazarenes:
Who, in addition, was attempting to make the Temple unclean: whom we took,
[]
And from whom you will be able, by questioning him yourself, to get knowledge of all the things which we say against him.
And the Jews were in agreement with his statement, saying that these things were so.
Then when the ruler had given him a sign to make his answer, Paul said, Because I have knowledge that you have been a judge over this nation for a number of years, I am glad to make my answer:
Seeing that you are able to make certain of the fact that it is not more than twelve days from the time when I came up to Jerusalem for worship;
And they have not seen me in argument with any man in the Temple, or working up the feelings of the people, in the Synagogues or in the town:
And they are not able to give facts in support of the things which they say against me now.
But this I will say openly to you, that I do give worship to the God of our fathers after that Way, which to them is not the true religion: but I have belief in all the things which are in the law and in the books of the prophets:
Hoping in God for that which they themselves are looking for, that there will be a coming back from the dead for upright men and wrongdoers.
And in this, I do my best at all times to have no reason for shame before God or men.
Now after a number of years I came to give help and offerings to my nation:
And having been made clean, I was in the Temple, but not with a great number of people, and not with noise: but there were certain Jews from Asia,
And it would have been better if they had come here to make a statement, if they have anything against me.
Or let these men here present say what wrongdoing was seen in me when I was before the Sanhedrin,
But only this one thing which I said among them in a loud voice, I am this day being judged on the question of the coming back from the dead.
But Felix, who had a more detailed knowledge of the Way, put them off, saying, When Lysias, the chief captain, comes down, I will give attention to your business.
And he gave orders to the captain to keep Paul under his control, and to let him have everything he had need of; and not to keep his friends from coming to see him.
But after some days, Felix came with Drusilla his wife, who was of the Jews by birth, and sent for Paul, and gave hearing to him about faith in Christ Jesus.
And while he was talking about righteousness and self-control and the judging which was to come, Felix had great fear and said, Go away for the present, and when the right time comes I will send for you.
For he was hoping that Paul would give him money: so he sent for him more frequently and had talk with him.
But after two years Porcius Festus took the place of Felix, who, desiring to have the approval of the Jews, kept Paul in chains.
So Festus, having come into that part of the country which was under his rule, after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.
And the chief priests and the chief men of the Jews made statements against Paul,
Requesting Festus to give effect to their design against him, and send him to Jerusalem, when they would be waiting to put him to death on the way.
But Festus, in answer, said that Paul was being kept in prison at Caesarea, and that in a short time he himself was going there.
So, he said, let those who have authority among you go with me, and if there is any wrong in the man, let them make a statement against him.
And when he had been with them not more than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea; and on the day after, he took his place on the judge's seat, and sent for Paul.
And when he came, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem came round him, and made all sorts of serious statements against him, which were not supported by the facts.
Then Paul, in his answer to them, said, I have done no wrong against the law of the Jews, or against the Temple, or against Caesar.
But Festus, desiring to get the approval of the Jews, said to Paul, Will you go up to Jerusalem, and be judged before me there in connection with these things?
And Paul said, I am before the seat of Caesar's authority where it is right for me to be judged: I have done no wrong to the Jews, as you are well able to see.
If, then, I am a wrongdoer and there is a cause of death in me, I am ready for death: if it is not as they say against me, no man may give me up to them. Let my cause come before Caesar.
Then Festus, having had a discussion with the Jews, made answer, You have said, Let my cause come before Caesar; to Caesar you will go.
Now when some days had gone by, King Agrippa and Bernice came to Caesarea and went to see Festus.
And as they were there for some days, Festus gave them Paul's story, saying, There is a certain man here who was put in prison by Felix:
Against whom the chief priests and the rulers of the Jews made a statement when I was at Jerusalem, requesting me to give a decision against him.
To whom I gave answer that it is not the Roman way to give a man up, till he has been face to face with those who are attacking him, and has had a chance to give an answer to the statements made against him.
So, when they had come together here, straight away, on the day after, I took my place on the judge's seat and sent for the man.
But when they got up they said nothing about such crimes as I had in mind:
But had certain questions against him in connection with their religion, and about one Jesus, now dead, who, Paul said, was living.
And as I had not enough knowledge for the discussion of these things, I made the suggestion to him to go to Jerusalem and be judged there.
But when Paul made a request that he might be judged by Caesar, I gave orders for him to be kept till I might send him to Caesar.
And Agrippa said to Festus, I have a desire to give the man a hearing myself. Tomorrow, he said, you may give him a hearing.
So on the day after, when Agrippa and Bernice in great glory had come into the public place of hearing, with the chief of the army and the chief men of the town, at the order of Festus, Paul was sent for.
And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all those who are present here with us, you see this man, about whom all the Jews have made protests to me, at Jerusalem and in this place, saying that it is not right for him to be living any longer.
But, in my opinion, there is no cause of death in him, and as he himself has made a request to be judged by Caesar, I have said that I would send him.
But I have no certain account of him to send to Caesar. So I have sent for him to come before you, and specially before you, King Agrippa, so that after the business has been gone into, I may have something to put in writing.
For it seems to me against reason to send a prisoner without making clear what there is against him.
And Agrippa said to Paul, You may put your cause before us. Then Paul, stretching out his hand, made his answer, saying:
In my opinion I am happy, King Agrippa, to be able to give my answer before you today to all these things which the Jews say against me:
The more so, because you are expert in all questions to do with the Jews and their ways: so I make my request to you to give me a hearing to the end.
All the Jews have knowledge of my way of life from my early years, as it was from the start among my nation, and at Jerusalem;
And they are able to say, if they would give witness, that I was living as a Pharisee, in that division of our religion which is most regular in the keeping of the law.
And now I am here to be judged because of the hope given by God's word to our fathers;
For the effecting of which our twelve tribes have been working and waiting night and day with all their hearts. And in connection with this hope I am attacked by the Jews, O king!
Why, in your opinion, is it outside belief for God to make the dead come to life again?
For I, truly, was of the opinion that it was right for me to do a number of things against the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
And this I did in Jerusalem: and numbers of the saints I put in prison, having had authority given to me from the chief priests, and when they were put to death, I gave my decision against them.
And I gave them punishment frequently, in all the Synagogues, forcing them to say things against God; and burning with passion against them, I went after them even into far-away towns.
Then, when I was journeying to Damascus with the authority and orders of the chief priests,
In the middle of the day, on the road I saw a light from heaven, brighter than the sun, shining round me and those who were journeying with me.
And when we had all gone down on the earth, a voice came to me, saying in the Hebrew language, Saul, Saul, why are you attacking me so cruelly? It is hard for you to go against the impulse which is driving you.
And I said, Who are you, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus, whom you are attacking.
But get up on your feet: for I have come to you for this purpose, to make you a servant and a witness of the things in which you have seen me, and of those in which you will see me;
And I will keep you safe from the people, and from the Gentiles, to whom I send you,
To make their eyes open, turning them from the dark to the light, and from the power of Satan to God, so that they may have forgiveness of sins and a heritage among those who are made holy by faith in me.
So, then, King Agrippa, I did not go against the vision from heaven;
But I went about, first to those in Damascus and Jerusalem, and through all the country of Judaea, and then to the Gentiles, preaching a change of heart, so that they, being turned to God, might give, in their works, the fruits of a changed heart.
For this reason, the Jews took me in the Temple, and made an attempt to put me to death.
And so, by God's help, I am here today, witnessing to small and great, saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses said would come about;
That the Christ would go through pain, and being the first to come back from the dead, would give light to the people and to the Gentiles.
And when he made his answer in these words, Festus said in a loud voice, Paul, you are off your head; your great learning has made you unbalanced.
Then Paul said, I am not off my head, most noble Festus, but my words are true and wise.
For the king has knowledge of these things, to whom I am talking freely; being certain that all this is common knowledge to him; for it has not been done in secret.
King Agrippa, have you faith in the prophets? I am certain that you have.
And Agrippa said to Paul, A little more and you will be making me a Christian.
And Paul said, It is my prayer to God that, in little or great measure, not only you, but all those hearing me today might be even as I am, but for these chains.
And the king and the ruler and Bernice and those who were seated with them got up;
And when they had gone away they said to one another, This man has done nothing which might give cause for death or prison.
And Agrippa said to Festus, This man might have been made free, if he had not put his cause before Caesar.
And when the decision had been made that we were to go by sea to Italy, they gave Paul and certain other prisoners into the care of a captain named Julius, of the Augustan band.
And we went to sea in a ship of Adramyttium which was sailing to the sea towns of Asia, Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.
And on the day after, we came to Sidon; and Julius was kind to Paul, and let him go to see his friends and take a rest.
And sailing again from there, we went on under cover of Cyprus, because the wind was against us.
And having gone across the sea off Cilicia and Pamphylia we came to Myra, in Lycia.
And there the captain came across a ship of Alexandria, sailing for Italy, and put us in it.
And when we had gone on slowly for a long time, and had had hard work getting across to Cnidus, for the wind was against us, we went under cover of Crete, in the direction of Salmone;
And sailing down the side of it, as well as we were able, we came to a certain place named Fair Havens, near which was the town of Lasea.
And as a long time had gone by, and the journey was now full of danger, because it was late in the year, Paul put the position before them,
Saying, Friends, I see that this journey will be one of great damage and loss, not only to the goods and the ship, but to ourselves.
But the captain gave more attention to the master and the owner of the ship than to what Paul said.
And as the harbour was not a good one in which to be for the winter, the greater number of them were for going out to sea, in order, if possible, to put in for the winter at Phoenix, a harbour of Crete, looking to the north-east and south-east.
And when the south wind came softly, being of the opinion that their purpose might be effected, they let the ship go and went sailing down the side of Crete, very near to the land.
But after a little time, a very violent wind, named Euraquilo, came down from it with great force.
And when the ship got into the grip of it, and was not able to make headway into the wind, we gave way, and went before it.
And, sailing near the side of a small island named Cauda, we were able, though it was hard work, to make the ship's boat safe:
And having got it up, they put cords under and round the ship; but fearing that they might be pushed on to the Syrtis, they let down the sails and so went running before the wind.
And, still fighting the storm with all our strength, the day after they made a start at getting the goods out of the ship;
And on the third day, they let all the sailing apparatus go over the side.
And as we had not seen the sun or stars for a long time, and a great storm was on us, all hope of salvation was gone.
And when they had been without food for a long time, Paul got up among them and said, Friends, it would have been better if you had given attention to me and not gone sailing out from Crete, to undergo this damage and loss.
But now, I say to you, be of good heart, for there will be no loss of life, but only of the ship.
For this night there came to my side an angel of the God who is my Master and whose servant I am,
Saying, Have no fear, Paul, for you will come before Caesar, and God has given to you all those who are sailing with you.
And so, O men, be of good heart, for I have faith in God that it will be as he said to me.
But we will be sent on to a certain island.
But when the fourteenth day came, while we were going here and there in the Adriatic sea, about the middle of the night the sailors had an idea that they were getting near land;
And they let down the lead, and saw that the sea was a hundred and twenty feet deep; and after a little time they did it again and it was ninety feet.
Then, fearing that by chance we might come on to the rocks, they let down four hooks from the back of the ship, and made prayers for the coming of day.
Then the sailors made attempts secretly to get away from the ship, letting down a boat as if they were about to put down hooks from the front of the ship;
But Paul said to the captain and his men, If you do not keep these men in the ship, you will not be safe.
Then the armed men, cutting the cords of the boat, let her go.
And when dawn was near, Paul gave them all orders to take food, saying, This is the fourteenth day you have been waiting and taking no food.
So I make request to you to take food; for this is for your salvation: not a hair from the head of any of you will come to destruction.
And when he had said this and had taken bread, he gave praise to God before them all, and took a meal of the broken bread.
Then they all took heart and did the same.
And we were, in the ship, two hundred and seventy-six persons.
And when they had had enough food, they made the weight of the ship less, turning the grain out into the sea.
And when it was day, they had no knowledge of the land, but they saw an inlet of the sea with a floor of sand, and they had the idea of driving the ship up on to it if possible.
So cutting away the hooks, and letting them go into the sea, and freeing the cords of the guiding-blades, and lifting up the sail to the wind, they went in the direction of the inlet.
And coming to a point between two seas, they got the ship to land; and the front part was fixed in the sand and not able to be moved, but the back part was broken by the force of the waves.
Then the armed men were for putting the prisoners to death, so that no one would get away by swimming.
But the captain, desiring to keep Paul safe, kept them from their purpose, and gave orders that those who had knowledge of swimming were to go off the ship and get first to land:
And the rest, some on boards and some on things from the ship. And so it came about that they all got safe to land.
And when we were safe, we made the discovery that the island was named Melita.
And the simple people living there were uncommonly kind to us, for they made a fire for us, and took us in, because it was raining and cold.
But when Paul had got some sticks together and put them on the fire, a snake came out, because of the heat, and gave him a bite on the hand.
And when the people saw it hanging on his hand, they said to one another, Without doubt this man has put someone to death, and though he has got safely away from the sea, God will not let him go on living.
But shaking off the beast into the fire, he got no damage.
But they had the idea that they would see him becoming ill, or suddenly falling down dead; but after waiting a long time, and seeing that no damage came to him, changing their opinion, they said he was a god.
Now near that place there was some land, the property of the chief man of the island, who was named Publius; who very kindly took us into his house as his guests for three days.
And the father of Publius was ill, with a disease of the stomach; to whom Paul went, and put his hands on him, with prayer, and made him well.
And when this took place, all the others in the island who had diseases came and were made well.
Then they gave us great honour, and, when we went away, they put into the ship whatever things we were in need of.
And after three months we went to sea in a ship of Alexandria sailing under the sign of the Dioscuri, which had been at the island for the winter.
And going into the harbour at Syracuse, we were waiting there for three days.
And from there, going about in a curve, we came to Rhegium: and after one day a south wind came up and on the day after we came to Puteoli:
Where we came across some of the brothers, who kept us with them for seven days; and so we came to Rome.
And the brothers, when they had news of us, came out from town as far as Appii Forum and the Three Taverns to have a meeting with us: and Paul, seeing them, gave praise to God and took heart.
And when we came into Rome, they let Paul have a house for himself and the armed man who kept watch over him.
Then after three days he sent for the chief men of the Jews: and when they had come together, he said to them, My brothers, though I had done nothing against the people or the ways of our fathers, I was given, a prisoner from Jerusalem, into the hands of the Romans.
Who, when they had put questions to me, were ready to let me go free, because there was no cause of death in me.
But when the Jews made protest against it, I had to put my cause into Caesar's hands; not because I have anything to say against my nation.
But for this reason I sent for you, to see and have talk with you: for because of the hope of Israel I am in these chains.
And they said to him, We have not had letters from Judaea about you, and no one of the brothers has come to us here to give an account or say any evil about you.
But we have a desire to give hearing to your opinion: for as to this form of religion, we have knowledge that in all places it is attacked.
And when a day had been fixed, they came to his house in great numbers; and he gave them teaching, giving witness to the kingdom of God, and having discussions with them about Jesus, from the law of Moses and from the prophets, from morning till evening.
And some were in agreement with what he said, but some had doubts.
And they went away, for there was a division among them after Paul had said this one thing: Well did the Holy Spirit say by the prophet Isaiah to your fathers,
Go to this people and say, Though you give ear, you will not get knowledge; and seeing, you will see, but the sense will not be clear to you:
For the heart of this people has become fat and their ears are slow in hearing and their eyes are shut; for fear that they might see with their eyes and give hearing with their ears and become wise in their hearts and be turned again to me, so that I might make them well.
Be certain, then, that the salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles, and they will give hearing.
[]
And for the space of two years, Paul was living in the house of which he had the use, and had talk with all those who went in to see him,
Preaching the kingdom of God and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ without fear, and no orders were given that he was not to do so.
Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, an Apostle by the selection of God, given authority as a preacher of the good news,
Of which God had given word before by his prophets in the holy Writings,
About his Son who, in the flesh, came from the family of David,
But was marked out as Son of God in power by the Holy Spirit through the coming to life again of the dead; Jesus Christ our Lord,
Through whom grace has been given to us, sending us out to make disciples to the faith among all nations, for his name:
Among whom you in the same way have been marked out to be disciples of Jesus Christ:
To all those who are in Rome, loved by God, marked out as saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
First of all, I give praise to my God through Jesus Christ for you all, because news of your faith has gone into all the world.
For God is my witness, whose servant I am in spirit in the good news of his Son, that you are at all times in my memory and in my prayers,
And that I am ever making prayers that God will give me a good journey to you.
For I have a strong desire to see you, and to give you some grace of the spirit, so that you may be made strong;
That is to say, that all of us may be comforted together by the faith which is in you and in me.
You may be certain, my brothers, that it has frequently been in my mind to come to you (but till now I was kept from it), so that I might have some fruit from you in the same way as I have had it from the other nations.
I have a debt to Greeks and to the nations outside; to the wise and to those who have no learning.
For which reason I have the desire, as far as I am able, to give the knowledge of the good news to you who are in Rome.
For I have no feeling of shame about the good news, because it is the power of God giving salvation to everyone who has faith, to the Jew first, and then to the Greek.
For in it there is the revelation of the righteousness of God from faith to faith: as it is said in the holy Writings, The man who does righteousness will be living by his faith.
For there is a revelation of the wrath of God from heaven against all the wrongdoing and evil thoughts of men who keep down what is true by wrongdoing;
Because the knowledge of God may be seen in them, God having made it clear to them.
For from the first making of the world, those things of God which the eye is unable to see, that is, his eternal power and existence, are fully made clear, he having given the knowledge of them through the things which he has made, so that men have no reason for wrongdoing:
Because, having the knowledge of God, they did not give glory to God as God, and did not give praise, but their minds were full of foolish things, and their hearts, being without sense, were made dark.
Seeming to be wise, they were in fact foolish,
And by them the glory of the eternal God was changed and made into the image of man who is not eternal, and of birds and beasts and things which go on the earth.
For this reason God gave them up to the evil desires of their hearts, working shame in their bodies with one another:
Because by them the true word of God was changed into that which is false, and they gave worship and honour to the thing which is made, and not to him who made it, to whom be blessing for ever. So be it.
For this reason God gave them up to evil passions, and their women were changing the natural use into one which is unnatural:
And in the same way the men gave up the natural use of the woman and were burning in their desire for one another, men doing shame with men, and getting in their bodies the right reward of their evil-doing.
And because they had not the mind to keep God in their knowledge, God gave them up to an evil mind, to do those things which are not right;
Being full of all wrongdoing, evil, desire for the goods of others, hate, envy, putting to death, fighting, deceit, cruel ways, evil talk, and false statements about others;
Hated by God, full of pride, without respect, full of loud talk, given to evil inventions, not honouring father or mother,
Without knowledge, not true to their undertakings, unkind, having no mercy:
Who, though they have knowledge of the law of God, that the fate of those who do these things is death, not only go on doing these things themselves, but give approval to those who do them.
So you have no reason, whoever you are, for judging: for in judging another you are judging yourself, for you do the same things.
And we are conscious that God is a true judge against those who do such things.
But you who are judging another for doing what you do yourself, are you hoping that God's decision will not take effect against you?
Or is it nothing to you that God had pity on you, waiting and putting up with you for so long, not seeing that in his pity God's desire is to give you a change of heart?
But by your hard and unchanged heart you are storing up wrath for yourself in the day of the revelation of God's judging in righteousness;
Who will give to every man his right reward:
To those who go on with good works in the hope of glory and honour and salvation from death, he will give eternal life:
But to those who, from a love of competition, are not guided by what is true, will come the heat of his wrath,
Trouble and sorrow on all whose works are evil, to the Jew first and then to the Greek;
But glory and honour and peace to all whose works are good, to the Jew first and then to the Greek:
For one man is not different from another before God.
All those who have done wrong without the law will get destruction without the law: and those who have done wrong under the law will have their punishment by the law;
For it is not the hearers of the law who will be judged as having righteousness before God, but only the doers:
For when the Gentiles without the law have a natural desire to do the things in the law, they are a law to themselves;
Because the work of the law is seen in their hearts, their sense of right and wrong giving witness to it, while their minds are at one time judging them and at another giving them approval;
In the day when God will be a judge of the secrets of men, as it says in the good news of which I am a preacher, through Jesus Christ.
But as for you who have the name of Jew, and are resting on the law, and take pride in God,
And have knowledge of his desires, and are a judge of the things which are different, having the learning of the law,
In the belief that you are a guide to the blind, a light to those in the dark,
A teacher of the foolish, having in the law the form of knowledge and of what is true;
You who give teaching to others, do you give it to yourself? you who say that a man may not take what is not his, do you take what is not yours?
You who say that a man may not be untrue to his wife, are you true to yours? you who are a hater of images, do you do wrong to the house of God?
You who take pride in the law, are you doing wrong to the honour of God by behaviour which is against the law?
For the name of God is shamed among the Gentiles because of you, as it is said in the holy Writings.
It is true that circumcision is of use if you keep the law, but if you go against the law it is as if you had it not.
If those who have not circumcision keep the rules of the law, will it not be credited to them as circumcision?
And they, by their keeping of the law without circumcision, will be judges of you, by whom the law is broken though you have the letter of the law and circumcision.
The true Jew is not one who is only so publicly, and circumcision is not that which may be seen in the flesh:
But he is a Jew who is a secret one, whose circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit and not in the letter; whose praise is not from men, but from God.
How then is the Jew better off? or what profit is there in circumcision?
Much in every way: first of all because the words of God were given to them.
And if some have no faith, will that make the faith of God without effect?
In no way: but let God be true, though every man is seen to be untrue; as it is said in the Writings, That your words may be seen to be true, and you may be seen to be right when you are judged.
But if the righteousness of God is supported by our wrongdoing what is to be said? is it wrong for God to be angry (as men may say)?
In no way: because if it is so, how is God able to be the judge of all the world?
But if, because I am untrue, God being seen to be true gets more glory, why am I to be judged as a sinner?
Let us not do evil so that good may come (a statement which we are falsely said by some to have made), because such behaviour will have its right punishment.
What then? are we worse off than they? In no way: because we have before made it clear that Jews as well as Greeks are all under the power of sin;
As it is said in the holy Writings, There is not one who does righteousness;
Not one who has the knowledge of what is right, not one who is a searcher after God;
They have all gone out of the way, there is no profit in any of them; there is not one who does good, not so much as one:
Their throat is like an open place of death; with their tongues they have said what is not true: the poison of snakes is under their lips:
Whose mouth is full of curses and bitter words:
Their feet are quick in running after blood;
Destruction and trouble are in their ways;
And of the way of peace they have no knowledge:
There is no fear of God before their eyes.
Now, we have knowledge that what the law says is for those who are under the law, so that every mouth may be stopped, and all men may be judged by God:
Because by the works of the law no man is able to have righteousness in his eyes, for through the law comes the knowledge of sin.
But now without the law there is a revelation of the righteousness of God, to which witness is given by the law and the prophets;
That is, the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ, to all those who have faith; and one man is not different from another,
For all have done wrong and are far from the glory of God;
And they may have righteousness put to their credit, freely, by his grace, through the salvation which is in Christ Jesus:
Whom God has put forward as the sign of his mercy, through faith, by his blood, to make clear his righteousness when, in his pity, God let the sins of earlier times go without punishment;
And to make clear his righteousness now, so that he might himself be upright, and give righteousness to him who has faith in Jesus.
What reason, then, is there for pride? It is shut out. By what sort of law? of works? No, but by a law of faith.
For this reason, then, a man may get righteousness by faith without the works of the law.
Or is God the God of Jews only? is he not in the same way the God of Gentiles? Yes, of Gentiles:
If God is one; and he will give righteousness because of faith to those who have circumcision, and through faith to those who have not circumcision.
Do we, then, through faith make the law of no effect? in no way: but we make it clear that the law is important.
What, then, may we say that Abraham, our father after the flesh, has got?
For if Abraham got righteousness by works, he has reason for pride; but not before God.
But what does it say in the holy Writings? And Abraham had faith in God, and it was put to his account as righteousness.
Now, the reward is credited to him who does works, not as of grace but as a debt.
But to him who without working has faith in him who gives righteousness to the evil-doer, his faith is put to his account as righteousness.
As David says that there is a blessing on the man to whose account God puts righteousness without works, saying,
Happy are those who have forgiveness for their wrongdoing, and whose sins are covered.
Happy is the man against whom no sin is recorded by the Lord.
Is this blessing, then, for the circumcision only, or in the same way for those who have not circumcision? for we say that the faith of Abraham was put to his account as righteousness.
How, then, was it judged? when he had circumcision, or when he had it not? Not when he had it, but when he did not have it:
And he was given the sign of circumcision as a witness of the faith which he had before he underwent circumcision: so that he might be the father of all those who have faith, though they have not circumcision, and so that righteousness might be put to their account;
And the father of circumcision to those who not only are of the circumcision, but who keep to the way of that faith which our father Abraham had before he underwent circumcision.
For God's word, that the earth would be his heritage, was given to Abraham, not through the law, but through the righteousness of faith.
For if they who are of the law are the people who get the heritage, then faith is made of no use, and the word of God has no power;
For the outcome of the law is wrath; but where there is no law it will not be broken.
For this reason it is of faith, so that it may be through grace; and so that the word of God may be certain to all the seed; not only to that which is of the law, but to that which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all,
(As it is said in the holy Writings, I have made you a father of a number of nations) before him in whom he had faith, that is, God, who gives life to the dead, and to whom the things which are not are as if they were.
Who without reason for hope, in faith went on hoping, so that he became the father of a number of nations, as it had been said, So will your seed be.
And not being feeble in faith though his body seemed to him little better than dead (he being about a hundred years old) and Sarah was no longer able to have children:
Still, he did not give up faith in the undertaking of God, but was made strong by faith, giving glory to God,
And being certain that God was able to keep his word.
For which reason it was put to his account as righteousness.
Now, it was not because of him only that this was said,
But for us in addition, to whose account it will be put, if we have faith in him who made Jesus our Lord come back again from the dead,
Who was put to death for our evil-doing, and came to life again so that we might have righteousness.
For which reason, because we have righteousness through faith, let us be at peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ;
Through whom, in the same way, we have been able by faith to come to this grace in which we now are; and let us have joy in hope of the glory of God.
And not only so, but let us have joy in our troubles: in the knowledge that trouble gives us the power of waiting;
And waiting gives experience; and experience, hope:
And hope does not put to shame; because our hearts are full of the love of God through the Holy Spirit which is given to us.
For when we were still without strength, at the right time Christ gave his life for evil-doers.
Now it is hard for anyone to give his life even for an upright man, though it might be that for a good man someone would give his life.
But God has made clear his love to us, in that, when we were still sinners, Christ gave his life for us.
Much more, if we now have righteousness by his blood, will salvation from the wrath of God come to us through him.
For if, when we were haters of God, the death of his Son made us at peace with him, much more, now that we are his friends, will we have salvation through his life;
And not only so, but we have joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we are now at peace with God.
For this reason, as through one man sin came into the world, and death because of sin, and so death came to all men, because all have done evil:
Because, till the law came, sin was in existence, but sin is not put to the account of anyone when there is no law to be broken.
But still death had power from Adam till Moses, even over those who had not done wrong like Adam, who is a picture of him who was to come.
But the free giving of God is not like the wrongdoing of man. For if, by the wrongdoing of one man death came to numbers of men, much more did the grace of God, and the free giving by the grace of one man, Jesus Christ, come to men.
And the free giving has not the same effect as the sin of one: for the effect of one man's sin was punishment by the decision of God, but the free giving had power to give righteousness to wrongdoers in great number.
For, if by the wrongdoing of one, death was ruling through the one, much more will those to whom has come the wealth of grace and the giving of righteousness, be ruling in life through the one, even Jesus Christ.
So then, as the effect of one act of wrongdoing was that punishment came on all men, even so the effect of one act of righteousness was righteousness of life for all men.
Because, as numbers of men became sinners through the wrongdoing of one man, even so will great numbers get righteousness through the keeping of the word of God by one man.
And the law came in addition, to make wrongdoing worse; but where there was much sin, there was much more grace:
That, as sin had power in death, so grace might have power through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
What may we say, then? are we to go on in sin so that there may be more grace?
In no way. How may we, who are dead to sin, be living in it any longer?
Or are you without the knowledge that all we who had baptism into Christ Jesus, had baptism into his death?
We have been placed with him among the dead through baptism into death: so that as Christ came again from the dead by the glory of the Father, we, in the same way, might be living in new life.
For, if we have been made like him in his death, we will, in the same way, be like him in his coming to life again;
Being conscious that our old man was put to death on the cross with him, so that the body of sin might be put away, and we might no longer be servants to sin.
Because he who is dead is free from sin.
But if we are dead with Christ, we have faith that we will be living with him;
Having knowledge that because Christ has come back from the dead, he will never again go down to the dead; death has no more power over him.
For his death was a death to sin, but his life now is a life which he is living to God.
Even so see yourselves as dead to sin, but living to God in Christ Jesus.
For this cause do not let sin be ruling in your body which is under the power of death, so that you give way to its desires;
And do not give your bodies to sin as the instruments of wrongdoing, but give yourselves to God, as those who are living from the dead, and your bodies as instruments of righteousness to God.
For sin may not have rule over you: because you are not under law, but under grace.
What then? are we to go on in sin because we are not under law but under grace? Let it not be so.
Are you not conscious that you are the servants of him to whom you give yourselves to do his desire? if to sin, the end being death, or if to do the desire of God, the end being righteousness.
But praise be to God that though you were the servants of sin, you have now given yourselves freely to that form of teaching under which you were placed;
And being made free from sin you have been made the servants of righteousness.
I am using words in the way of men, because your flesh is feeble: as you gave your bodies as servants to what is unclean, and to evil to do evil, so now give them as servants to righteousness to do what is holy.
When you were servants of sin you were free from righteousness.
What fruit had you at that time in the things which are now a shame to you? for the end of such things is death.
But now, being free from sin, and having been made servants to God, you have your fruit in that which is holy, and the end is eternal life.
For the reward of sin is death; but what God freely gives is eternal life in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Is it not clear, my brothers (I am using an argument to those who have knowledge of the law), that the law has power over a man as long as he is living?
For the woman who has a husband is placed by the law under the power of her husband as long as he is living; but if her husband is dead, she is free from the law of the husband.
So if, while the husband is living, she is joined to another man, she will get the name of one who is untrue to her husband: but if the husband is dead, she is free from the law, so that she is not untrue, even if she takes another man.
In the same way, my brothers, you were made dead to the law through the body of Christ, so that you might be joined to another, even to him who came again from the dead, so that we might give fruit to God.
For when we were in the flesh, the evil passions which came into being through the law were working in our bodies to give the fruit of death.
But now we are free from the law, having been made dead to that which had power over us; so that we are servants in the new way of the spirit, not in the old way of the letter.
What then is to be said? is the law sin? in no way. But I would not have had knowledge of sin but for the law: for I would not have been conscious of desire if the law had not said, You may not have a desire for what is another's.
But sin, taking its chance through that which was ordered by the law, was working in me every form of desire: because without the law sin is dead.
And there was a time when I was living without the law: but when the law gave its orders, sin came to life and put me to death;
And I made the discovery that the law whose purpose was to give life had become a cause of death:
For I was tricked and put to death by sin, which took its chance through the law.
But the law is holy, and its orders are holy, upright, and good.
Was then that which is good, death to me? In no way. But the purpose was that sin might be seen to be sin by working death to me through that which is good; so that through the orders of the law sin might seem much more evil.
For we are conscious that the law is of the spirit; but I am of the flesh, given into the power of sin.
And I have no clear knowledge of what I am doing, for that which I have a mind to do, I do not, but what I have hate for, that I do.
But, if I do that which I have no mind to do, I am in agreement with the law that the law is good.
So it is no longer I who do it, but the sin living in me.
For I am conscious that in me, that is, in my flesh, there is nothing good: I have the mind but not the power to do what is right.
For the good which I have a mind to do, I do not: but the evil which I have no mind to do, that I do.
But if I do what I have no mind to do, it is no longer I who do it, but the sin living in me.
So I see a law that, though I have a mind to do good, evil is present in me.
In my heart I take pleasure in the law of God,
But I see another law in my body, working against the law of my mind, and making me the servant of the law of sin which is in my flesh.
How unhappy am I! who will make me free from the body of this death?
I give praise to God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So with my mind I am a servant to the law of God, but with my flesh to the law of sin.
For this cause those who are in Christ Jesus will not be judged as sinners.
For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death.
For what the law was not able to do because it was feeble through the flesh, God, sending his Son in the image of the evil flesh, and as an offering for sin, gave his decision against sin in the flesh:
So that what was ordered by the law might be done in us, who are living, not in the way of the flesh, but in the way of the Spirit.
For those who are living in the way of the flesh give their minds to the things of the flesh, but those who go in the way of the Spirit, to the things of the Spirit.
For the mind of the flesh is death, but the mind of the Spirit is life and peace:
Because the mind of the flesh is opposite to God; it is not under the law of God, and is not able to be:
So that those who are in the flesh are not able to give pleasure to God.
You are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if the Spirit of God is in you. But if any man has not the Spirit of Christ he is not one of his.
And if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness.
But if the Spirit of him who made Jesus come again from the dead is in you, he who made Christ Jesus come again from the dead will in the same way, through his Spirit which is in you, give life to your bodies which now are under the power of death.
So then, my brothers, we are in debt, not to the flesh to be living in the way of the flesh:
For if you go in the way of the flesh, death will come on you; but if by the Spirit you put to death the works of the body, you will have life.
And all those who are guided by the Spirit of God are sons of God.
For you did not get the spirit of servants again to put you in fear, but the spirit of sons was given to you, by which we say, Abba, Father.
The Spirit is witness with our spirit that we are children of God:
And if we are children, we have a right to a part in the heritage; a part in the things of God, together with Christ; so that if we have a part in his pain, we will in the same way have a part in his glory.
I am of the opinion that there is no comparison between the pain of this present time and the glory which we will see in the future.
For the strong desire of every living thing is waiting for the revelation of the sons of God.
For every living thing was put under the power of change, not by its desire, but by him who made it so, in hope
That all living things will be made free from the power of death and will have a part with the free children of God in glory.
For we are conscious that all living things are weeping and sorrowing in pain together till now.
And not only so, but we who have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we have sorrow in our minds, waiting for the time when we will take our place as sons, that is, the salvation of our bodies.
For our salvation is by hope: but hope which is seen is not hope: for who is hoping for what he sees?
But if we have hope for that which we see not, then we will be able to go on waiting for it.
And in the same way the Spirit is a help to our feeble hearts: for we are not able to make prayer to God in the right way; but the Spirit puts our desires into words which are not in our power to say;
And he who is the searcher of hearts has knowledge of the mind of the Spirit, because he is making prayers for the saints in agreement with the mind of God.
And we are conscious that all things are working together for good to those who have love for God, and have been marked out by his purpose.
Because those of whom he had knowledge before they came into existence, were marked out by him to be made like his Son, so that he might be the first among a band of brothers:
And those who were marked out by him were named; and those who were named were given righteousness; and to those to whom he gave righteousness, in the same way he gave glory.
What may we say about these things? If God is for us, who is against us?
He who did not keep back his only Son, but gave him up for us all, will he not with him freely give us all things?
Who will say anything against the saints of God? It is God who makes us clear from evil;
Who will give a decision against us? It is Christ Jesus who not only was put to death, but came again from the dead, who is now at the right hand of God, taking our part.
Who will come between us and the love of Christ? Will trouble, or pain, or cruel acts, or the need of food or of clothing, or danger, or the sword?
As it is said in the holy Writings, Because of you we are put to death every day; we are like sheep ready for destruction.
But we are able to overcome all these things and more through his love.
For I am certain that not death, or life, or angels, or rulers, or things present, or things to come, or powers,
Or things on high, or things under the earth, or anything which is made, will be able to come between us and the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
I say what is true in Christ, and not what is false, my mind giving witness with me in the Holy Spirit,
That I am full of sorrow and pain without end.
For I have a desire to take on myself the curse for my brothers, my family in the flesh:
Who are Israelites: who have the place of sons, and the glory, and the agreements with God, and the giving of the law, and the worship, and the hope offered by God:
Whose are the fathers, and of whom came Christ in the flesh, who is over all, God, to whom be blessing for ever. So be it.
But it is not as if the word of God was without effect. For they are not all Israel, who are of Israel:
And they are not all children because they are the seed of Abraham; but, In Isaac will your seed be named.
That is, it is not the children of the flesh, but the children of God's undertaking, who are named as the seed.
For this is the word of God's undertaking, At this time will I come, and Sarah will have a son.
And not only so, but Rebecca being about to have a child by our father Isaac —
Before the children had come into existence, or had done anything good or bad, in order that God's purpose and his selection might be effected, not by works, but by him whose purpose it is,
It was said to her, The older will be the servant of the younger.
Even as it is said, I had love for Jacob, but for Esau I had hate.
What may we say then? is God not upright? let it not be said.
For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and pity on whom I will have pity.
So then, it is not by the desire or by the attempt of man, but by the mercy of God.
For the holy Writings say to Pharaoh, For this same purpose did I put you on high, so that I might make my power seen in you, and that there might be knowledge of my name through all the earth.
So then, at his pleasure he has mercy on a man, and at his pleasure he makes the heart hard.
But you will say to me, Why does he still make us responsible? who is able to go against his purpose?
But, O man, who are you, to make answer against God? May the thing which is made say to him who made it, Why did you make me so?
Or has not the potter the right to make out of one part of his earth a vessel for honour, and out of another a vessel for shame?
What if God, desiring to let his wrath and his power be seen, for a long time put up with the vessels of wrath which were ready for destruction:
And to make clear the wealth of his glory to vessels of mercy, which he had before made ready for glory,
Even us, who were marked out by him, not only from the Jews, but from the Gentiles?
As he says in Hosea, They will be named my people who were not my people, and she will be loved who was not loved.
And in the place where it was said to them, You are not my people, there they will be named the sons of the living God.
And Isaiah says about Israel, Even if the number of the children of Israel is as the sand of the sea, only a small part will get salvation:
For the Lord will give effect to his word on the earth, putting an end to it and cutting it short.
And, as Isaiah had said before, If the Lord of armies had not given us a seed, we would have been like Sodom and Gomorrah.
What then may we say? That the nations who did not go after righteousness have got righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith:
But Israel, going after a law of righteousness, did not get it.
Why? Because they were not searching for it by faith, but by works. They came up against the stone which was in the way;
As it is said, See, I am putting in Zion a stone causing a fall, and a rock in the way: but he who has faith in him will not be put to shame.
Brothers, my heart's desire and my prayer to God for them is, that they may get salvation.
For I give witness of them that they have a strong desire for God, but not with knowledge.
Because, not having knowledge of God's righteousness, and desiring to give effect to their righteousness, they have not put themselves under the righteousness of God.
For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to everyone who has faith.
For Moses says that the man who does the righteousness which is of the law will get life by it.
But the righteousness which is of faith says these words, Say not in your heart, Who will go up to heaven? (that is, to make Christ come down:)
Or, Who will go down into the deep? (that is, to make Christ come again from the dead:)
But what does it say? The word is near you, in your mouth and in your heart: that is, the word of faith of which we are the preachers:
Because, if you say with your mouth that Jesus is Lord, and have faith in your heart that God has made him come back from the dead, you will have salvation:
For with the heart man has faith to get righteousness, and with the mouth he says that Jesus is Lord to get salvation.
Because it is said in the holy Writings, Whoever has faith in him will not be shamed.
And the Jew is not different from the Greek: for there is the same Lord of all, who is good to all who have hope in his name:
Because, Whoever will give worship to the name of the Lord will get salvation.
But how will they give worship to him in whom they have no faith? and how will they have faith in him of whom they have not had news? and how will they have news without a preacher?
And how will there be preachers if they are not sent? As it is said, How beautiful are the feet of those who give the glad news of good things.
But they have not all given ear to the good news. For Isaiah says, Lord, who has had faith in our word?
So faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ.
But I say, Did not the word come to their ears? Yes, certainly: Their sound has gone out into all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world.
But I say, Had Israel no knowledge? First Moses says, You will be moved to envy by that which is not a nation, and by a foolish people I will make you angry.
And Isaiah says without fear, Those who were not searching for me made discovery of me; and I was seen by those whose hearts were turned away from me.
But about Israel he says; All the day my hands have been stretched out to a people whose hearts were turned away, and who put themselves against my word.
So I say, Has God put his people on one side? Let there be no such thought. For I am of Israel, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
God has not put away the people of his selection. Or have you no knowledge of what is said about Elijah in the holy Writings? how he says words to God against Israel,
Lord, they have put your prophets to death, and made waste your altars, and now I am the last, and they are searching for me to take away my life.
But what answer does God make to him? I have still seven thousand men whose knees have not been bent to Baal.
In the same way, there are at this present time some who are marked out by the selection of grace.
But if it is of grace, then it is no longer of works: or grace would not be grace.
What then? That which Israel was searching for he did not get, but those of the selection got it and the rest were made hard.
As it was said in the holy Writings, God gave them a spirit of sleep, eyes which might not see, and ears which have no hearing, to this day.
And David says, Let their table be made a net for taking them, and a stone in their way, and a punishment:
Let their eyes be made dark so that they may not see, and let their back be bent down at all times.
So I say, Were their steps made hard in order that they might have a fall? In no way: but by their fall salvation has come to the Gentiles, so that they might be moved to envy.
Now, if their fall is the wealth of the world, and their loss the wealth of the Gentiles, how much greater will be the glory when they are made full?
But I say to you, Gentiles, in so far as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I make much of my position:
If in any way those who are of my flesh may be moved to envy, so that some of them may get salvation by me.
For, if by their putting away, the rest of men have been made friends with God, what will their coming back again be, but life from the dead?
And if the first-fruit is holy, so is the mass: and if the root is holy, so are the branches.
But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, an olive-tree of the fields, were put in among them, and were given a part with them in the root by which the olive-tree is made fertile,
Do not be uplifted in pride over the branches: because it is not you who are the support of the root, but it is by the root that you are supported.
You will say, Branches were broken off so that I might be put in.
Truly, because they had no faith they were broken off, and you have your place by reason of your faith. Do not be lifted up in pride, but have fear;
For, if God did not have mercy on the natural branches, he will not have mercy on you.
See then that God is good but his rules are fixed: to those who were put away he was hard, but to you he has been good, on the condition that you keep in his mercy; if not, you will be cut off as they were.
And they, if they do not go on without faith, will be united to the tree again, because God is able to put them in again.
For if you were cut out of a field olive-tree, and against the natural use were united to a good olive-tree, how much more will these, the natural branches, be united again with the olive-tree which was theirs?
For it is my desire, brothers, that this secret may be clear to you, so that you may not have pride in your knowledge, that Israel has been made hard in part, till all the Gentiles have come in;
And so all Israel will get salvation: as it is said in the holy Writings, There will come out of Zion the One who makes free; by him wrongdoing will be taken away from Jacob:
And this is my agreement with them, when I will take away their sins.
As far as the good news is in question, they are cut off from God on account of you, but as far as the selection is in question, they are loved on account of the fathers.
Because God's selection and his mercies may not be changed.
For as you, in time past, were not under the rule of God, but now have got mercy through their turning away,
So in the same way these have gone against the orders of God, so that by the mercy given to you they may now get mercy.
For God has let them all go against his orders, so that he might have mercy on them all.
O how deep is the wealth of the wisdom and knowledge of God! no one is able to make discovery of his decisions, and his ways may not be searched out.
Who has knowledge of the mind of the Lord? or who has taken part in his purposes?
Or who has first given to him, and it will be given back to him again?
For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things. To him be the glory for ever. So be it.
For this reason I make request to you, brothers, by the mercies of God, that you will give your bodies as a living offering, holy, pleasing to God, which is the worship it is right for you to give him.
And let not your behaviour be like that of this world, but be changed and made new in mind, so that by experience you may have knowledge of the good and pleasing and complete purpose of God.
But I say to every one of you, through the grace given to me, not to have an over-high opinion of himself, but to have wise thoughts, as God has given to every one a measure of faith.
For, as we have a number of parts in one body, but all the parts have not the same use,
So we, though we are a number of persons, are one body in Christ, and are dependent on one another;
And having different qualities by reason of the grace given to us, such as the quality of a prophet, let it be made use of in relation to the measure of our faith;
Or the position of a Deacon of the church, let a man give himself to it; or he who has the power of teaching, let him make use of it;
He who has the power of comforting, let him do so; he who gives, let him give freely; he who has the power of ruling, let him do it with a serious mind; he who has mercy on others, let it be with joy.
Let love be without deceit. Be haters of what is evil; keep your minds fixed on what is good.
Be kind to one another with a brother's love, putting others before yourselves in honour;
Be not slow in your work, but be quick in spirit, as the Lord's servants;
Being glad in hope, quiet in trouble, at all times given to prayer,
Giving to the needs of the saints, ready to take people into your houses.
Give blessing and not curses to those who are cruel to you.
Take part in the joy of those who are glad, and in the grief of those who are sorrowing.
Be in harmony with one another. Do not have a high opinion of yourselves, but be in agreement with common people. Do not give yourselves an air of wisdom.
Do not give evil for evil to any man. Let all your business be well ordered in the eyes of all men.
As far as it is possible for you be at peace with all men.
Do not give punishment for wrongs done to you, dear brothers, but give way to the wrath of God; for it is said in the holy Writings, Punishment is mine, I will give reward, says the Lord.
But if one who has hate for you is in need of food or of drink, give it to him, for in so doing you will put coals of fire on his head.
Do not let evil overcome you, but overcome evil by good.
Let everyone put himself under the authority of the higher powers, because there is no power which is not of God, and all powers are ordered by God.
For which reason everyone who puts himself against the authority puts himself against the order of God: and those who are against it will get punishment for themselves.
For rulers are not a cause of fear to the good work but to the evil. If you would have no fear of the authority, do good and you will have praise;
For he is the servant of God to you for good. But if you do evil, have fear; for the sword is not in his hand for nothing: he is God's servant, making God's punishment come on the evil-doer.
So put yourselves under the authority, not for fear of wrath, but because you have the knowledge of what is right.
For the same reason, make payment of taxes; because the authority is God's servant, to take care of such things at all times.
Give to all what is their right: taxes to him whose they are, payment to him whose right it is, fear to whom fear, honour to whom honour is to be given.
Be in debt for nothing, but to have love for one another: for he who has love for his neighbour has kept all the law.
And this, Do not be untrue in married life, Do not put to death, Do not take what is another's, Do not have desire for what is another's, and if there is any other order, it is covered by this word, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself.
Love does no wrong to his neighbour, so love makes the law complete.
See then that the time has come for you to be awake from sleep: for now is your salvation nearer than when you first had faith.
The night is far gone, and the day is near: so let us put off the works of the dark, arming ourselves with light,
With right behaviour as in the day; not in pleasure-making and drinking, not in bad company and unclean behaviour, not in fighting and envy.
But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and do not give thought to the flesh to do its desires.
Do not put on one side him who is feeble in faith, and do not put him in doubt by your reasonings.
One man has faith to take all things as food: another who is feeble in faith takes only green food.
Let not him who takes food have a low opinion of him who does not: and let not him who does not take food be a judge of him who does; for he has God's approval.
Who are you to make yourself a judge of another man's servant? it is to his master that he is responsible for good or bad. Yes, his place will be safe, because the Lord is able to keep him from falling.
This man puts one day before another: to that man they are the same. Let every man be certain in his mind.
He who keeps the day, keeps it to the Lord; and he who takes food, takes it as to the Lord, for he gives praise to God; and he who does not take food, to the Lord he takes it not, and gives praise to God.
For every man's life and every man's death has a relation to others as well as to himself.
As long as we have life we are living to the Lord; or if we give up our life it is to the Lord; so if we are living, or if our life comes to an end, we are the Lord's.
And for this purpose Christ went into death and came back again, that he might be the Lord of the dead and of the living.
But you, why do you make yourself your brother's judge? or again, why have you no respect for your brother? because we will all have to take our place before God as our judge.
For it is said in the holy Writings, By my life, says the Lord, to me every knee will be bent, and every tongue will give worship to God.
So every one of us will have to give an account of himself to God.
Then let us not be judges of one another any longer: but keep this in mind, that no man is to make it hard for his brother, or give him cause for doubting.
I am conscious of this, and am certain in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean in itself; but for the man in whose opinion it is unclean, for him it is unclean.
And if because of food your brother is troubled, then you are no longer going on in the way of love. Do not let your food be destruction to him for whom Christ went into death.
Let it not be possible for men to say evil about your good:
For the kingdom of God is not food and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.
And he who in these things is Christ's servant, is pleasing to God and has the approval of men.
So then, let us go after the things which make peace, and the things by which we may be a help to one another.
Do not let the work of God come to nothing on account of food. All things are certainly clean; but it is evil for that man who by taking food makes it hard for another.
It is better not to take meat or wine or to do anything which might be a cause of trouble to your brother.
The faith which you have, have it to yourself before God. Happy is the man who is not judged by that to which he gives approval.
But he who is in doubt is judged if he takes food, because he does it not in faith; and whatever is not of faith is sin.
We who are strong have to be a support to the feeble, and not give pleasure to ourselves.
Let every one of us give pleasure to his neighbour for his good, to make him strong.
For Christ did not give pleasure to himself, but, as it is said, The bitter words of those who were angry with you came on me.
Now those things which were put down in writing before our time were for our learning, so that through quiet waiting and through the comfort of the holy Writings we might have hope.
Now may the God who gives comfort and strength in waiting make you of the same mind with one another in harmony with Christ Jesus:
So that with one mouth you may give glory to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So then, take one another to your hearts, as Christ took us, to the glory of God.
Now I say that Christ has been made a servant of the circumcision to give effect to the undertakings given by God to the fathers,
And so that the Gentiles might give glory to God for his mercy; as it is said, For this reason I will give praise to you among the Gentiles, and I will make a song to your name.
And again he says, Take part, you Gentiles, in the joy of his people.
And again, Give praise to the Lord, all you Gentiles; and let all the nations give praise to him.
And again Isaiah says, There will be the root of Jesse, and he who comes to be the ruler over the Gentiles; in him will the Gentiles put their hope.
Now may the God of hope make you full of joy and peace through faith, so that all hope may be yours in the power of the Holy Spirit.
And I myself am certain of you, brothers, that you are full of what is good, complete in all knowledge, able to give direction to one another.
But I have, in some measure, less fear in writing to you to put these things before you again, because of the grace which was given to me by God,
To be a servant of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles, doing the work of a priest in the good news of God, so that the offering of the Gentiles might be pleasing to God, being made holy by the Holy Spirit.
So I have pride in Christ Jesus in the things which are God's.
And I will keep myself from talking of anything but those things which Christ has done by me to put the Gentiles under his rule in word and in act,
By signs and wonders, in the power of the Holy Spirit; so that from Jerusalem and round about as far as Illyricum I have given all the good news of Christ;
Making it my purpose not to take the good news where Christ was named, so that my work might not be resting on that of others;
But as it is said in the holy Writings, They will see, to whom the news of him had not been given, and those to whose ears it had not come will have knowledge.
For which reason I was frequently kept from coming to you:
But now, having no longer any place in these parts and having had for a number of years a great desire to come to you,
Whenever I go to Spain (for it is my hope to see you on my way, and to be sent on there by you, if first I may in some measure have been comforted by your company) —
But now I go to Jerusalem, taking help for the saints.
For it has been the good pleasure of those of Macedonia and Achaia to send a certain amount of money for the poor among the saints at Jerusalem.
Yes, it has been their good pleasure; and they are in their debt. For if the Gentiles have had a part in the things of the Spirit which were theirs, it is right for them, in the same way, to give them help in the things of the flesh.
So when I have done this, and have given them this fruit of love, I will go on by you into Spain.
And I am certain that when I come, I will be full of the blessing of Christ.
Now I make request to you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of the Spirit, that you will be working together with me in your prayers to God for me;
So that I may be kept safe from those in Judaea who have not put themselves under the rule of God, and that the help which I am taking for Jerusalem may be pleasing to the saints;
So that I may come to you in joy by the good pleasure of God, and have rest with you.
Now may the God of peace be with you all. So be it.
It is my desire to say a good word for Phoebe, who is a servant of the church in Cenchreae:
That you will take her in kindly, after the way of the saints, as one who is the Lord's, and give her help in anything in which she may have need of you: because she has been a help to a great number and to myself.
Give my love to Prisca and Aquila, workers with me in Christ Jesus,
Who for my life put their necks in danger; to whom not only I but all the churches of the Gentiles are in debt:
And say a kind word to the church which is in their house. Give my love to my dear Epaenetus, who is the first fruit of Asia to Christ.
Give my love to Mary, who gave much care to you.
Give my love to Andronicus and Junia, my relations, who were in prison with me, who are noted among the Apostles, and who were in Christ before me.
Give my love to Ampliatus, who is dear to me in the Lord,
Give my love to Urbanus, a worker in Christ with us, and to my dear Stachys.
Give my love to Apelles, who has the approval of Christ. Say a kind word to those who are of the house of Aristobulus.
Give my love to Herodion, my relation. Say a kind word to those of the house of Narcissus, who are in the Lord.
Give my love to Tryphaena and Tryphosa, workers in the Lord. Give my love to my dear Persis, who did much work in the Lord.
Give my love to Rufus, one of the Lord's selection, and to his mother and mine.
Give my love to Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers who are with them.
Give my love to Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them.
Give one another a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ send their love to you.
Now, it is my desire, brothers, that you will take note of those who are causing division and trouble among you, quite against the teaching which was given to you: and keep away from them.
For such people are not servants of the Lord Christ, but of their stomachs; and by their smooth and well-said words the hearts of those who have no knowledge of evil are tricked.
For all have knowledge of how you do what you are ordered. For this reason I have joy in you, but it is my desire that you may be wise in what is good, and without knowledge of evil.
And the God of peace will be crushing Satan under your feet before long. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Timothy, who is working with me, sends his love to you, so do Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, my relations.
I, Tertius, who have done the writing of this letter, send love in the Lord.
Gaius, with whom I am living, whose house is open to all the church, sends his love, so does Erastus, the manager of the accounts of the town, and Quartus, the brother.
[]
Now to him who is able to make you strong in agreement with the good news which I gave you and the preaching of Jesus Christ, in the light of the revelation of that secret which has been kept through times eternal,
But is now made clear; and by the writings of the prophets, by the order of the eternal God, the knowledge of it has been given to all the nations, so that they may come under the rule of the faith;
To the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, be the glory for ever. So be it.
Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the purpose of God, and Sosthenes the brother,
To the church of God which is in Corinth, to those who have been made holy in Christ Jesus, saints by the selection of God, with all those who in every place give honour to the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I give praise to my God for you at all times, because of the grace of God which has been given to you in Christ Jesus;
So that in him you have wealth in all things, in word and in knowledge of every sort;
Even as the witness of the Christ has been made certain among you:
So that having every grace you are living in the hope of the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ;
Who will give you strength to the end, to be free from all sin in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
God is true, through whom you have been given a part with his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Now I make request to you, my brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you will all say the same thing, and that there may be no divisions among you, so that you may be in complete agreement, in the same mind and in the same opinion.
Because it has come to my knowledge, through those of the house of Chloe, that there are divisions among you, my brothers.
That is, that some of you say, I am of Paul; some say, I am of Apollos; some say, I am of Cephas; and some say, I am Christ's.
Is there a division in Christ? was Paul nailed to the cross for you? or were you given baptism in the name of Paul?
I give praise to God that not one of you had baptism from me, but Crispus and Gaius;
So that no one may be able to say that you had baptism in my name.
And I gave baptism to the house of Stephanas; but I am not certain that any others had baptism from me.
For Christ sent me, not to give baptism, but to be a preacher of the good news: not with wise words, for fear that the cross of Christ might be made of no value.
For the word of the cross seems foolish to those who are on the way to destruction; but to us who are on the way to salvation it is the power of God.
As it says in the holy Writings, I will put an end to the wisdom of the wise, and will put on one side the designs of those who have knowledge.
Where is the wise? where is he who has knowledge of the law? where is the man of this world who has a love of discussion? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?
For because, by the purpose of God, the world, with all its wisdom, had not the knowledge of God, it was God's pleasure, by so foolish a thing as preaching, to give salvation to those who had faith in him.
Seeing that the Jews make request for signs, and the Greeks are looking for knowledge:
But we give the good news of Christ on the cross, a hard thing to the Jews, and a foolish thing to the Gentiles;
But to those of God's selection, Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power and the wisdom of God.
Because what seems foolish in God is wiser than men; and what seems feeble in God is stronger than men.
For you see God's design for you, my brothers, that he has not taken a great number of the wise after the flesh, not the strong, not the noble:
But God made selection of the foolish things of this world so that he might put the wise to shame; and the feeble things that he might put to shame the strong;
And the low things of the world, and the things without honour, did God make selection of, yes, even the things which are not, so that he might make as nothing the things which are:
So that no flesh might have glory before God.
But God has given you a place in Christ Jesus, through whom God has given us wisdom and righteousness and salvation, and made us holy:
So that, as it is said in the holy Writings, Whoever has a desire for glory, let his glory be in the Lord.
And when I came to you, my brothers, I did not come with wise words of knowledge, putting before you the secret of God.
For I had made the decision to have knowledge of nothing among you but only of Jesus Christ on the cross.
And I was with you without strength, in fear and in doubt.
And in my preaching there were no honeyed words of wisdom, but I was dependent on the power of the Spirit to make it clear to you:
So that your faith might be based not on man's wisdom but on the power of God.
But still we have wisdom for those who are complete in knowledge, though not the wisdom of this world, and not of the rulers of this world, who are coming to nothing:
But we give the news of the secret wisdom of God, which he had kept in store before the world came into existence, for our glory;
Of which not one of the rulers of this world had knowledge: for if they had, they would not have put the Lord of glory on the cross:
But as it says in the holy Writings, Things which the eye saw not, and which had not come to the ears or into the heart of man, such things as God has made ready for those who have love for him.
But God has given us the revelation of these things through his Spirit, for the Spirit makes search into all things, even the deep things of God.
For who has knowledge of the things of a man but the spirit of the man which is in him? in the same way, no one has knowledge of the things of God but the Spirit of God.
But we have not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which comes from God, so that we may have knowledge of the things which are freely given to us by God.
And these are the things which we say, not in the language of man's wisdom, but in words given to us by the Spirit, judging the things of the spirit by the help of the Spirit.
For the natural man is not able to take in the things of the Spirit of God: for they seem foolish to him, and he is not able to have knowledge of them, because such knowledge comes only through the Spirit.
But he who has the Spirit, though judging all things, is himself judged by no one.
For who has knowledge of the mind of the Lord, so as to be his teacher? But we have the mind of Christ.
And the teaching I gave you, my brothers, was such as I was able to give, not to those who have the Spirit, but to those who are still in the flesh, even to children in Christ.
I gave you milk and not meat, because you were, then, unable to take it, and even now you are not able;
Because you are still in the flesh: for when there is envy and division among you, are you not still walking after the way of the flesh, even as natural men?
For when one says, I am of Paul; and another says, I am of Apollos; are you not talking like natural men?
What then is Apollos? and what is Paul? They are but servants who gave you the good news as God gave it to them.
I did the planting, Apollos did the watering, but God gave the increase.
So then the planter is nothing, and the waterer is nothing; but God who gives the increase.
Now the planter and the waterer are working for the same end: but they will have their separate rewards in the measure of their work.
For we are workers with God: you are God's planting, God's building.
In the measure of the grace given to me, I, as a wise master-builder, have put the base in position, and another goes on building on it. But let every man take care what he puts on it.
For there is no other base for the building but that which has been put down, which is Jesus Christ.
But on the base a man may put gold, silver, stones of great price, wood, dry grass, cut stems;
Every man's work will be made clear in that day, because it will be tested by fire; and the fire itself will make clear the quality of every man's work.
If any man's work comes through the test, he will have a reward.
If the fire puts an end to any man's work, it will be his loss: but he will get salvation himself, though as by fire.
Do you not see that you are God's holy house, and that the Spirit of God has his place in you?
If anyone makes the house of God unclean, God will put an end to him; for the house of God is holy, and you are his house.
Let no man have a false idea. If any man seems to himself to be wise among you, let him become foolish, so that he may be wise.
For the wisdom of this world is foolish before God. As it is said in the holy Writings, He who takes the wise in their secret designs:
And again, The Lord has knowledge of the reasonings of the wise, that they are nothing.
So let no one take pride in men. For all things are yours;
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours;
And you are Christ's; and Christ is God's.
Let us be judged as servants of Christ, and as those who are responsible for the secret things of God.
And it is right for such servants to be safe persons.
But it is a small thing to me that I am judged by you or by man's judging; I am not even a judge of myself.
For I am not conscious of any wrong in myself; but this does not make me clear, for it is the Lord who is my judge.
For this reason let there be no judging before the time, till the Lord comes, who will make clear the secret things of the dark, and the designs of the heart; and then will every man have his praise from God.
My brothers, it is because of you that I have taken Apollos and myself as examples of these things, so that in us you might see that it is not wise to go farther than what is in the holy Writings, so that no one of you may be lifted up against his brother.
For who made you better than your brother? or what have you that has not been given to you? but if it has been given to you, what cause have you for pride, as if it had not been given to you?
For even now you are full, even now you have wealth, you have been made kings without us: truly, I would be glad if you were kings, so that we might be kings with you.
For it seems to me that God has put us the Apostles last of all, as men whose fate is death: for we are put on view to the world, and to angels, and to men.
We are made to seem foolish for Christ, but you are wise in Christ; we are feeble, but you are strong; you have glory, but we have shame.
Even to this hour we are without food, drink, and clothing, we are given blows and have no certain resting-place;
And with our hands we do the hardest work: when they give us curses we give blessings, when we undergo punishment we take it quietly;
When evil things are said about us we give gentle answers: we are made as the unclean things of the world, as that for which no one has any use, even till now.
I am not saying these things to put you to shame, but so that, as my dear children, you may see what is right.
For even if you had ten thousand teachers in Christ, you have not more than one father: for in Christ Jesus I have given birth to you through the good news.
So my desire is that you take me as your example.
For this cause I have sent Timothy to you, who is my dear and true child in the Lord; he will make clear to you my ways in Christ, even as I am teaching everywhere in every church.
Now some are full of pride, as if I was not coming to you.
But I will come to you in a short time, if it is pleasing to the Lord, and I will take note, not of the word of those who are full of pride, but of the power.
For the kingdom of God is not in word but in power.
What is your desire? is my coming to be with punishment, or is it to be in love and a gentle spirit?
It is said, in fact, that there is among you a sin of the flesh, such as is not seen even among the Gentiles, that one of you has his father's wife.
And in place of feeling sorrow, you are pleased with yourselves, so that he who has done this thing has not been sent away from among you.
For I myself, being present in spirit though not in body, have come to a decision about him who has done this thing;
In the name of our Lord Jesus, when you have come together with my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus,
That this man is to be handed over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may have forgiveness in the day of the Lord Jesus.
This pride of yours is not good. Do you not see that a little leaven makes a change in all the mass?
Take away, then, the old leaven, so that you may be a new mass, even as you are without leaven. For Christ has been put to death as our Passover.
Let us then keep the feast, not with old leaven, and not with the leaven of evil thoughts and acts, but with the unleavened bread of true thoughts and right feelings.
In my letter I said to you that you were not to keep company with those who go after the desires of the flesh;
But I had not in mind the sinners who are outside the church, or those who have a desire for and take the property of others, or those who give worship to images; for it is not possible to keep away from such people without going out of the world completely:
But the sense of my letter was that if a brother had the name of being one who went after the desires of the flesh, or had the desire for other people's property, or was in the way of using violent language, or being the worse for drink, or took by force what was not his, you might not keep company with such a one, or take food with him.
For it is no business of mine to be judging those who are outside; but it is yours to be judging those who are among you;
As for those who are outside, God is their judge. So put away the evil man from among you.
How is it, that if any one of you has a cause at law against another, he takes it before a Gentile judge and not before the saints?
Is it not certain that the saints will be the judges of the world? if then the world will be judged by you, are you unable to give a decision about the smallest things?
Is it not certain that we are to be the judges of angels? how much more then of the things of this life?
If then there are questions to be judged in connection with the things of this life, why do you put them in the hands of those who have no position in the church?
I say this to put you to shame. Is there not among you one wise man who may be able to give a decision between his brothers?
But a brother who has a cause at law against another takes it before Gentile judges.
More than this, it is not to your credit to have causes at law with one another at all. Why not put up with wrong? why not undergo loss?
So far from doing this, you yourselves do wrong and take your brothers' property.
Have you not knowledge that evil-doers will have no part in the kingdom of God? Have no false ideas about this: no one who goes after the desires of the flesh, or gives worship to images, or is untrue when married, or is less than a man, or makes a wrong use of men,
Or is a thief, or the worse for drink, or makes use of strong language, or takes by force what is not his, will have any part in the kingdom of God.
And such were some of you; but you have been washed, you have been made holy, you have been given righteousness in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and in the Spirit of our God.
I am free to do all things; but not all things are wise. I am free to do all things; but I will not let myself come under the power of any.
Food is for the stomach and the stomach for food, and God will put an end to them together. But the body is not for the desires of the flesh, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body:
And God who made the Lord Jesus come back from the dead will do the same for us by his power.
Do you not see that your bodies are part of the body of Christ? how then may I take what is a part of the body of Christ and make it a part of the body of a loose woman? such a thing may not be.
Or do you not see that he who is joined to a loose woman is one body with her? for God has said, The two of them will become one flesh.
But he who is united to the Lord is one spirit.
Keep away from the desires of the flesh. Every sin which a man does is outside of the body; but he who goes after the desires of the flesh does evil to his body.
Or are you not conscious that your body is a house for the Holy Spirit which is in you, and which has been given to you by God? and you are not the owners of yourselves;
For a payment has been made for you: let God be honoured in your body.
Now, as to the things in your letter to me: It is good for a man to have nothing to do with a woman.
But because of the desires of the flesh, let every man have his wife, and every woman her husband.
Let the husband give to the wife what is right; and let the wife do the same to the husband.
The wife has not power over her body, but the husband; and in the same way the husband has not power over his body, but the wife.
Do not keep back from one another what is right, but only for a short time, and by agreement, so that you may give yourselves to prayer, and come together again; so that Satan may not get the better of you through your loss of self-control.
But this I say as my opinion, and not as an order of the Lord.
It is my desire that all men might be even as I am. But every man has the power of his special way of life given him by God, one in this way and one in that.
But I say to the unmarried and to the widows, It is good for them to be even as I am.
But if they have not self-control let them get married; for married life is better than the burning of desire.
But to the married I give orders, though not I but the Lord, that the wife may not go away from her husband
(Or if she goes away from him, let her keep unmarried, or be united to her husband again); and that the husband may not go away from his wife.
But to the rest I say, and not the Lord; If a brother has a wife who is not a Christian, and it is her desire to go on living with him, let him not go away from her.
And if a woman has a husband who is not a Christian, and it is his desire to go on living with her, let her not go away from her husband.
For the husband who has not faith is made holy through his Christian wife, and the wife who is not a Christian is made holy through the brother: if not, your children would be unholy, but now are they holy.
But if the one who is not a Christian has a desire to go away, let it be so: the brother or the sister in such a position is not forced to do one thing or the other: but it is God's pleasure that we may be at peace with one another.
For how may you be certain, O wife, that you will not be the cause of salvation to your husband? or you, O husband, that you may not do the same for your wife?
Only, as the Lord has given to a man, and as is the purpose of God for him, so let him go on living. And these are my orders for all the churches.
If any man who is a Christian has had circumcision, let him keep so; and if any man who is a Christian has not had circumcision, let him make no change.
Circumcision is nothing, and its opposite is nothing, but only doing the orders of God is of value.
Let every man keep the position in which he has been placed by God.
If you were a servant when you became a Christian, let it not be a grief to you; but if you have a chance to become free, make use of it.
For he who was a servant when he became a Christian is the Lord's free man; and he who was free when he became a Christian is the Lord's servant.
It is the Lord who has made payment for you: be not servants of men.
My brothers, let every man keep in that condition which is the purpose of God for him.
Now about virgins I have no orders from the Lord: but I give my opinion as one to whom the Lord has given mercy to be true to him.
In my opinion then, because of the present trouble, it is good for a man to keep as he is.
If you are married to a wife, make no attempt to get free from her: if you are free from a wife, do not take a wife.
If you get married it is not a sin; and if an unmarried woman gets married it is not a sin. But those who do so will have trouble in the flesh. But I will not be hard on you.
But I say this, my brothers, the time is short; and from now it will be wise for those who have wives to be as if they had them not;
And for those who are in sorrow, to give no signs of it; and for those who are glad, to give no signs of joy; and for those who are getting property, to be as if they had nothing;
And for those who make use of the world, not to be using it fully; for this world's way of life will quickly come to an end.
But it is my desire for you to be free from cares. The unmarried man gives his mind to the things of the Lord, how he may give pleasure to the Lord:
But the married man gives his attention to the things of this world, how he may give pleasure to his wife.
And the wife is not the same as the virgin. The virgin gives her mind to the things of the Lord, so that she may be holy in body and in spirit: but the married woman takes thought for the things of the world, how she may give pleasure to her husband.
Now I say this for your profit; not to make things hard for you, but because of what is right, and so that you may be able to give all your attention to the things of the Lord.
But if, in any man's opinion, he is not doing what is right for his virgin, if she is past her best years, and there is need for it, let him do what seems right to him; it is no sin; let them be married.
But the man who is strong in mind and purpose, who is not forced but has control over his desires, does well if he comes to the decision to keep her a virgin.
So then, he who gets married to his virgin does well, and he who keeps her unmarried does better.
It is right for a wife to be with her husband as long as he is living; but when her husband is dead, she is free to be married to another; but only to a Christian.
But it will be better for her to keep as she is, in my opinion: and it seems to me that I have the Spirit of God.
Now about things offered to images: we all seem to ourselves to have knowledge. Knowledge gives pride, but love gives true strength.
If anyone seems to himself to have knowledge, so far he has not the right sort of knowledge about anything;
But if anyone has love for God, God has knowledge of him.
So, then, as to the question of taking food offered to images, we are certain that an image is nothing in the world, and that there is no God but one.
For though there are those who have the name of gods, in heaven or on earth, as there are a number of gods and a number of lords,
There is for us only one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we are for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and we have our being through him.
Still, all men have not that knowledge: but some, being used till now to the image, are conscious that they are taking food which has been offered to the image; and because they are not strong in the faith, their minds are troubled.
But God's approval of us is not based on the food we take: if we do not take it we are no worse for it; and if we take it we are no better.
But take care that this power of yours does not give cause for trouble to the feeble.
For if a man sees you, who have knowledge, taking food as a guest in the house of an image, will it not give him, if he is feeble, the idea that he may take food offered to images?
And so, through your knowledge, you are the cause of destruction to your brother, for whom Christ underwent death.
And in this way, doing evil to the brothers, and causing trouble to those whose faith is feeble, you are sinning against Christ.
For this reason, if food is a cause of trouble to my brother, I will give up taking meat for ever, so that I may not be a cause of trouble to my brother.
Am I not free? am I not an Apostle? have I not seen Jesus our Lord? are you not my work in the Lord?
If to others I am not an Apostle, at least I am one to you: for the fact that you are Christians is the sign that I am an Apostle.
My answer to those who are judging me is this.
Have we no right to take food and drink?
Have we no right to take about with us a Christian wife, like the rest of the Apostles, and the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas?
Or I only and Barnabas, have we no right to take a rest from work?
Who ever goes to war without looking to someone to be responsible for his payment? who puts in vines and does not take the fruit of them? or who takes care of sheep without drinking of their milk?
Am I talking as a man? does not the law say the same?
For it says in the law of Moses, It is not right to keep the ox from taking the grain when he is crushing it. Is it for the oxen that God is giving orders?
Or has he us in mind? Yes, it was said for us; because it is right for the ploughman to do his ploughing in hope, and for him who is crushing the grain to do his work hoping for a part in the fruits of it.
If we have been planting the things of the Spirit for you, does it seem a great thing for you to give us a part in your things of this world?
If others have a part in this right over you, have we not even more? But we did not make use of our right, so that we might put nothing in the way of the good news of Christ.
Do you not see that the servants of the holy things get their living from the Temple, and the servants of the altar have their part in the food which is offered on the altar?
Even so did the Lord give orders that the preachers of the good news might get their living from the good news.
But I have not made use of any of these things: and I am not writing this in the hope that it may be so for me: for it would be better for me to undergo death, than for any man to make this pride of mine of no effect.
For if I am a preacher of the good news, I have no cause for pride in this; because I am forced to do so, for a curse is on me if I do not.
But if I do it gladly, I have a reward; and if not, I am under orders to do it.
What then is my reward? This, that when I am giving the good news, I may give it without payment, not making use of my rights as a preacher of the good news.
For though I was free from all men, I made myself a servant to all, so that more might have salvation.
And to the Jews I was as a Jew, so that I might give the good news to them; to those under the law I was the same, not as being myself under the law, but so that I might give the good news to those under the law.
To those without the law I was as one without the law, not as being without law to God, but as under law to Christ, so that I might give the good news to those without the law.
To the feeble, I was as one who is feeble, so that they might have salvation: I have been all things to all men, so that some at least might have salvation.
And I do all things for the cause of the good news, so that I may have a part in it.
Do you not see that in a running competition all take part, but only one gets the reward? So let your minds be fixed on the reward.
And every man who takes part in the sports has self-control in all things. Now they do it to get a crown which is of this world, but we for an eternal crown.
So then I am running, not uncertainly; so I am fighting, not as one who gives blows in the air:
But I give blows to my body, and keep it under control, for fear that, after having given the good news to others, I myself might not have God's approval.
For it is my desire, my brothers, that you may keep in mind how all our fathers were under the cloud, and they all went through the sea;
And they all had baptism from Moses in the cloud and in the sea;
And they all took the same holy food;
And the same holy drink: for they all took of the water from the holy rock which came after them: and the rock was Christ.
But with most of them God was not pleased: for they came to their end in the waste land.
Now these things were for an example to us, so that our hearts might not go after evil things, as they did.
Then do not go after false gods, as some of them did; as it is said in the holy Writings, After resting and feasting, the people got up to take their pleasure.
Again, let us not give way to the desires of the flesh, as some of them did, of whom twenty-three thousand came to their end in one day.
And let us not put the Lord to the test, as some of them did, and came to their death by snakes.
And do not say evil things against the Lord, as some of them did, and destruction overtook them.
Now these things were done as an example; and were put down in writing for our teaching, on whom the last days have come.
So let him who seems to himself to be safe go in fear of a fall.
You have been put to no test but such as is common to man: and God is true, who will not let any test come on you which you are not able to undergo; but he will make with the test a way out of it, so that you may be able to go through it.
For this cause, my dear brothers, give no worship to false gods.
What I am saying is for wise men, do you be the judges of it.
The cup of blessing which we take, does it not give us a part in the blood of Christ? and is not the broken bread a taking part in the body of Christ?
Because we, being a number of persons, are one bread, we are one body: for we all take part in the one bread.
See Israel after the flesh: do not those who take as food the offerings of the altar take a part in the altar?
Do I say, then, that what is offered to images is anything, or that the image is anything?
What I say is that the things offered by the Gentiles are offered to evil spirits and not to God; and it is not my desire for you to have any part with evil spirits.
It is not possible for you, at the same time, to take the cup of the Lord and the cup of evil spirits; you may not take part in the table of the Lord and the table of evil spirits.
Or may we be the cause of envy to the Lord? are we stronger than he?
We are free to do all things, but there are things which it is not wise to do. We are free to do all things, but not all things are for the common good.
Let a man give attention not only to what is good for himself, but equally to his neighbour's good.
Whatever meat may be had at the public market, take as food without question of right or wrong;
For the earth is the Lord's and all things in it.
If a Gentile makes a feast for you, and you are pleased to go as a guest, take whatever is put before you, without question of right or wrong.
But if anyone says to you, This food has been used as an offering, do not take it, on account of him who said it, and on account of his sense of right and wrong:
Right and wrong, I say, not for you, but for the other man; for the fact that I am free is not dependent on another man's sense of right or wrong.
But if I give praise to God for the food which I take, let no man say evil of me for that reason.
So then, if it is a question of food or drink, or any other thing, whatever you do, do all to the glory of God.
Give no cause of trouble to Jews, or to Greeks, or to the church of God.
Even as I give way to all men in all things, not looking for profit for myself, but for the good of others, that they may get salvation.
So take me for your example, even as I take Christ for mine.
Now I am pleased to see that you keep me in memory in all things, and that you give attention to the teaching which was handed down from me to you.
But it is important for you to keep this fact in mind, that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God.
Every man who takes part in prayer, or gives teaching as a prophet, with his head covered, puts shame on his head.
But every woman who does so with her head unveiled, puts shame on her head: for it is the same as if her hair was cut off.
For if a woman is not veiled, let her hair be cut off; but if it is a shame to a woman to have her hair cut off, let her be veiled.
For it is not right for a man to have his head covered, because he is the image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory of the man.
For the man did not come from the woman, but the woman from the man.
And the man was not made for the woman, but the woman for the man.
For this reason it is right for the woman to have a sign of authority on her head, because of the angels.
But the woman is not separate from the man, and the man is not separate from the woman in the Lord.
For as the woman is from the man, so the man is through the woman; but all things are from God.
Be judges yourselves of the question: does it seem right for a woman to take part in prayer unveiled?
Does it not seem natural to you that if a man has long hair, it is a cause of shame to him?
But if a woman has long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given to her for a covering.
But if any man will not be ruled in this question, this is not our way of doing things, and it is not done in the churches of God.
But in giving you this order, there is one thing about which I am not pleased: it is that when you come together it is not for the better but for the worse.
For first of all, it has come to my ears that when you come together in the church, there are divisions among you, and I take the statement to be true in part.
For divisions are necessary among you, in order that those who have God's approval may be clearly seen among you.
But now, when you come together, it is not possible to take the holy meal of the Lord:
For when you take your food, everyone takes his meal before the other; and one has not enough food, and another is the worse for drink.
What? have you not houses to take your meals in? or have you no respect for the church of God, putting the poor to shame? What am I to say to you? am I to give you praise? certainly not.
For it was handed down to me from the Lord, as I gave it to you, that the Lord Jesus, on the night when Judas was false to him, took bread,
And when it had been broken with an act of praise, he said, This is my body which is for you: do this in memory of me.
In the same way, with the cup, after the meal, he said, This cup is the new testament in my blood: do this, whenever you take it, in memory of me.
For whenever you take the bread and the cup you give witness to the Lord's death till he comes.
If, then, anyone takes the bread or the cup of the Lord in the wrong spirit, he will be responsible for the body and blood of the Lord.
But let no man take of the bread and the cup without testing himself.
For a man puts himself in danger, if he takes part in the holy meal without being conscious that it is the Lord's body.
For this cause a number of you are feeble and ill, and a number are dead.
But if we were true judges of ourselves, punishment would not come on us.
But if punishment does come, it is sent by the Lord, so that we may be safe when the world is judged.
So then, my brothers, when you come together to the holy meal of the Lord, let there be waiting for one another.
If any man is in need of food, let him take his meal in his house; so that you may not come together to your damage. And the rest I will put in order when I come.
But about the things of the spirit, my brothers, it is not right for you to be without teaching.
You are conscious that when you were Gentiles, in whatever way you were guided, you went after images without voice or power.
So it is my desire for you to be clear about this; that no one is able to say by the Spirit of God that Jesus is cursed; and no one is able to say that Jesus is Lord, but by the Holy Spirit.
Now there are different qualities given to men, but the same Spirit.
And there are different sorts of servants, but the same Lord.
And there are different operations, but the same God, who is working all things in all.
But to every man some form of the Spirit's working is given for the common good.
For to one are given words of wisdom through the Spirit; and to another words of knowledge through the same Spirit:
To another faith in the same Spirit; and to another the power of taking away disease, by the one Spirit;
And to another the power of working wonders; and to another the prophet's word; and to another the power of testing spirits; to another different sorts of tongues; and to another the power of making clear the sense of the tongues:
But all these are the operations of the one and the same Spirit, giving to every man separately as his pleasure is.
For as the body is one, and has a number of parts, and all the parts make one body, so is Christ.
For through the baptism of the one Spirit we were all formed into one body, Jews or Greeks, servants or free men, and were all made full of the same Spirit.
For the body is not one part, but a number of parts.
If the foot says, Because I am not the hand, I am not a part of the body; it is no less a part of the body.
And if the ear says, Because I am not the eye, I am not a part of the body; it is a part of the body all the same.
If all the body was an eye, where would be the hearing? if all was hearing, where would be the smelling?
But now God has put every one of the parts in the body as it was pleasing to him.
And if they were all one part, where would the body be?
But now they are all different parts, but one body.
And the eye may not say to the hand, I have no need of you: or again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.
No, those parts which seem to be feeble are the more necessary;
And to those parts of the body which seem to have less honour we give all the more honour; and to those parts of the body which are a cause of shame to us we give the greater respect;
But those parts of the body which are beautiful have no need of such care: and so the body has been joined together by God in such a way as to give more honour to those parts which had need of it;
So that there might be no division in the body; but all the parts might have the same care for one another.
And if there is pain in one part of the body, all the parts will be feeling it; or if one part is honoured, all the parts will be glad.
Now you are the body of Christ, and every one of you the separate parts of it.
And God has put some in the church, first, Apostles; second, prophets; third, teachers; then those with wonder-working powers, then those with the power of taking away disease, helpers, wise guides, users of strange tongues.
Are all Apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? have all the power of working wonders?
Are all able to take away disease? have all the power of tongues? are all able to give their sense?
But let your desires be turned to the more important things given by the Spirit. And now I am pointing out to you an even better way.
If I make use of the tongues of men and of angels, and have not love, I am like sounding brass, or a loud-tongued bell.
And if I have a prophet's power, and have knowledge of all secret things; and if I have all faith, by which mountains may be moved from their place, but have not love, I am nothing.
And if I give all my goods to the poor, and if I give my body to be burned, but have not love, it is of no profit to me.
Love is never tired of waiting; love is kind; love has no envy; love has no high opinion of itself, love has no pride;
Love's ways are ever fair, it takes no thought for itself; it is not quickly made angry, it takes no account of evil;
It takes no pleasure in wrongdoing, but has joy in what is true;
Love has the power of undergoing all things, having faith in all things, hoping all things.
Though the prophet's word may come to an end, tongues come to nothing, and knowledge have no more value, love has no end.
For our knowledge is only in part, and the prophet's word gives only a part of what is true:
But when that which is complete is come, then that which is in part will be no longer necessary.
When I was a child, I made use of a child's language, I had a child's feelings and a child's thoughts: now that I am a man, I have put away the things of a child.
For now we see things in a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now my knowledge is in part; then it will be complete, even as God's knowledge of me.
But now we still have faith, hope, love, these three; and the greatest of these is love.
Go after love; still desiring to have the things which the Spirit gives, but most of all that you may have the prophet's power.
For he who makes use of tongues is not talking to men but to God; because no one has the sense of what he is saying; but in the Spirit he is talking of secret things.
But the word of the prophet gives men knowledge and comfort and strength.
He who makes use of tongues may do good to himself; but he who gives the prophet's word does good to the church.
Now though it is my desire for you all to have the power of tongues, it would give me more pleasure to be hearing the prophet's word from you; for this is a greater thing than using tongues, if the sense is not given at the same time, for the good of the church.
But, now, my brothers, if I come to you using tongues, what profit will it be to you, if I do not give you a revelation, or knowledge, or the word of the prophet, or teaching?
Even things without life, having a voice, such as a music-pipe or other instrument, if they do not give out different sounds, who may be certain what is being played?
For if the war-horn gives out an uncertain note, who will get ready for the fight?
So if you, in using a strange tongue, say words which have no sense, how will anyone take in what you are saying? for you will be talking to the air.
There are, it may be, a number of different voices in the world, and no voice is without sense.
But if the sense of the voice is not clear to me, I am like a man from a strange country to him who is talking, and he will be the same to me.
So if you are desiring the things which the Spirit gives, let your minds be turned first to the things which are for the good of the church.
For this reason, let the man who has the power of using tongues make request that he may, at the same time, be able to give the sense.
For if I make use of tongues in my prayers, my spirit makes the prayer, but not my mind.
What then? let my prayer be from the spirit, and equally from the mind; let my song be from the spirit, and equally from mind.
For if you give a blessing with the spirit, how will the man who has no knowledge say, So be it, after your prayer, seeing that he has not taken in what you are saying?
For your giving of the blessing is certainly well done, but of no profit to the man without knowledge.
I give praise to God that I am able to make use of tongues more than you all:
But in the church it would be better for me to make use of five words of which the sense was clear, so that others might have profit, than ten thousand words in a strange tongue.
My brothers, do not be children in mind: in evil be as little children, but in mind be of full growth.
In the law it is said, By men of other tongues and by strange lips will my words come to this people; and not even so will they give ear to me, says the Lord.
For this reason tongues are for a sign, not to those who have faith, but to those who have not: but the prophet's word is for those who have faith, and not for the rest who have not.
If, then, the church has come together, and all are using tongues, and there come in men without knowledge or faith, will they not say that you are unbalanced?
But if all are teaching as prophets, and a man without faith or knowledge comes in, he is tested by all, he is judged by all;
The secrets of his heart are made clear; and he will go down on his face and give worship to God, saying that God is truly among you.
What is it then, my brothers? when you come together everyone has a holy song, or a revelation, or a tongue, or is giving the sense of it. Let everything be done for the common good.
If any man makes use of a tongue, let it not be more than two, or at the most three, and in turn; and let someone give the sense:
But if there is no one to give the sense, let him keep quiet in the church; and let his words be to himself and to God.
And let the prophets give their words, but not more than two or three, and let the others be judges of what they say.
But if a revelation is given to another who is seated near, let the first be quiet.
For you may all be prophets in turn so that all may get knowledge and comfort;
And the spirits of the prophets are controlled by the prophets;
For God is not a God whose ways are without order, but a God of peace; as in all the churches of the saints.
Let women keep quiet in the churches: for it is not right for them to be talking; but let them be under control, as it says in the law.
And if they have a desire for knowledge about anything, let them put questions to their husbands privately: for talking in the church puts shame on a woman.
What? was it from you that the word of God went out? or did it only come in to you?
If any man seems to himself to be a prophet or to have the Spirit, let him take note of the things which I am writing to you, as being the word of the Lord.
But if any man is without knowledge, let him be so.
So then, my brothers, let it be your chief desire to be prophets; but let no one be stopped from using tongues.
Let all things be done in the right and ordered way.
Now I am going to make clear to you, my brothers, what the good news was which I gave to you, and which you took, and on which your faith is based,
By which you have salvation; that is to say, the form in which it was given to you, if it is fixed in your minds, and if your faith in it is not without effect.
For I gave to you first of all what was handed down to me, how Christ underwent death for our sins, as it says in the Writings;
And he was put in the place of the dead; and on the third day he came back from the dead, as it says in the Writings;
And he was seen by Cephas; then by the twelve;
Then by more than five hundred brothers at the same time, most of whom are still living, but some are sleeping;
Then he was seen by James; then by all the Apostles.
And last of all, as by one whose birth was out of the right time, he was seen by me.
For I am the least of the Apostles, having no right to be named an Apostle, because of my cruel attacks on the church of God.
But by the grace of God, I am what I am: and his grace which was given to me has not been for nothing; for I did more work than all of them; though not I, but the grace of God which was with me.
If then it is I who am the preacher, or they, this is our word, and to this you have given your faith.
Now if the good news says that Christ came back from the dead, how do some of you say that there is no coming back from the dead?
But if there is no coming back from the dead, then Christ has not come back from the dead:
And if Christ did not come again from the dead, then our good news and your faith in it are of no effect.
Yes, and we are seen to be false witnesses of God; because we gave witness of God that by his power Christ came again from the dead: which is not true if there is no coming back from the dead.
For if it is not possible for the dead to come to life again, then Christ has not come to life again:
And if that is so, your faith is of no effect; you are still in your sins.
And, in addition, the dead in Christ have gone to destruction.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most unhappy.
But now Christ has truly come back from the dead, the first-fruits of those who are sleeping.
For as by man came death, so by man there is a coming back from the dead.
For as in Adam death comes to all, so in Christ will all come back to life.
But every man in his right order: Christ the first-fruits; then those who are Christ's at his coming.
Then comes the end, when he will give up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he will have put an end to all rule and to all authority and power.
For his rule will go on till he has put all those who are against him under his feet.
The last power to come to an end is death.
For, as it says, He has put all things under his feet. But when he says, All things are put under him, it is clear that it is not said about him who put all things under him.
And when all things have been put under him, then will the Son himself be under him who put all things under him, so that God may be all in all.
Again, what will they do who are given baptism for the dead? if the dead do not come back at all, why are people given baptism for them?
And why are we in danger every hour?
Yes, truly, by your pride in me, my brothers in Christ Jesus our Lord, my life is one long death.
If, after the way of men, I was fighting with beasts at Ephesus, what profit is it to me? If the dead do not come to life again, let us take our pleasure in feasting, for tomorrow we come to an end.
Do not be tricked by false words: evil company does damage to good behaviour.
Be awake to righteousness and keep yourselves from sin; for some have no knowledge of God: I say this to put you to shame.
But someone will say, How do the dead come back? and with what sort of body do they come?
Foolish man, it is necessary for the seed which you put into the earth to undergo death in order that it may come to life again:
And when you put it into the earth, you do not put in the body which it will be, but only the seed, of grain or some other sort of plant;
But God gives it a body, as it is pleasing to him, and to every seed its special body.
All flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one flesh of men, another of beasts, another of birds, and another of fishes.
And there are bodies of heaven and bodies of earth, but the glory of the one is different from that of the other.
There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for the glory of one star is different from that of another.
So is it with the coming back from the dead. It is planted in death; it comes again in life:
It is planted in shame; it comes again in glory: feeble when it is planted, it comes again in power:
It is planted a natural body; it comes again as a body of the spirit. If there is a natural body, there is equally a body of the spirit.
And so it is said, The first man Adam was a living soul. The last Adam is a life-giving spirit.
But that which is natural comes before that which is of the spirit.
The first man is from the earth, and of the earth: the second man is from heaven.
Those who are of the earth are like the man who was from the earth: and those who are of heaven are like the one from heaven.
And in the same way as we have taken on us the image of the man from the earth, so we will take on us the image of the one from heaven.
Now I say this, my brothers, that it is not possible for flesh and blood to have a part in the kingdom of God; and death may not have a part in life.
See, I am giving you the revelation of a secret: we will not all come to the sleep of death, but we will all be changed.
In a second, in the shutting of an eye, at the sound of the last horn: for at that sound the dead will come again, free for ever from the power of death, and we will be changed.
For this body which comes to destruction will be made free from the power of death, and the man who is under the power of death will put on eternal life.
But when this has taken place, then that which was said in the Writings will come true, Death is overcome by life.
O death, where is your power? O death, where are your pains?
The pain of death is sin; and the power of sin is the law:
But praise be to God who gives us strength to overcome through our Lord Jesus Christ.
For this cause, my dear brothers, be strong in purpose and unmoved, ever giving yourselves to the work of the Lord, because you are certain that your work is not without effect in the Lord.
Now about the giving of money for the saints, as I gave orders to the churches of Galatia, so do you.
On the first day of the week, let every one of you put by him in store, in measure as he has done well in business, so that it may not be necessary to get money together when I come.
And when I come, I will send the men of your selection with letters to take the money you have got together to Jerusalem.
And if it is possible for me to go there, they will go with me.
But I will come to you after I have gone through Macedonia, for that is my purpose;
But I may be with you for a time, or even for the winter, so that you may see me on my way, wherever I go.
For it is not my desire to see you now, on my way; because it is my hope to be with you for some time, if that is the Lord's pleasure.
But I will be at Ephesus till Pentecost;
For a great and important door there is open to me, and there are a number of people against me.
Now if Timothy comes, see that he is with you without fear; because he is doing the Lord's work, even as I am:
See then that he has the honour which is right. But send him on his way in peace, so that he may come to me: for I am looking for him with the brothers.
But as for Apollos, the brother, I had a great desire for him to come to you with the brothers, but it was not his pleasure to come now; but he will come when he has a chance.
Be on the watch, unmoved in the faith, and be strong like men.
Let all you do be done in love.
Now I make my request to you, my brothers, for you have knowledge that the house of Stephanas is the first-fruits of Achaia, and that they have made themselves the servants of the saints,
That you put yourselves under such, and under everyone who is helping the Lord's work.
And I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus: for they have done what was needed to make your work complete.
For they gave comfort to my spirit and to yours: for which cause give respect to such people.
The churches of Asia send their love to you. So do Aquila and Prisca, with the church which is in their house.
All the brothers send their love to you. Give one another a holy kiss.
I, Paul, send you these words of love in my writing.
If any man has not love for the Lord, let him be cursed. Maran atha (our Lord comes).
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. So be it.
Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the purpose of God, and Timothy the brother, to the church of God which is in Corinth, with all the saints who are in all Achaia:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort;
Who gives us comfort in all our troubles, so that we may be able to give comfort to others who are in trouble, through the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God.
For as we undergo more of the pain which Christ underwent, so through Christ does our comfort become greater.
But if we are troubled, it is for your comfort and salvation; or if we are comforted, it is for your comfort, which takes effect through your quiet undergoing of the same troubles which we undergo:
And our hope for you is certain; in the knowledge that as you take part in the troubles, so you will take part in the comfort.
For it is our desire that you may not be without knowledge of our trouble which came on us in Asia, that the weight of it was very great, more than our power, so that it seemed that we had no hope even of life:
Yes, we ourselves have had the answer of death in ourselves, so that our hope might not be in ourselves, but in God who is able to give life to the dead:
Who gave us salvation from so great a death: on whom we have put our hope that he will still go on to give us salvation;
You at the same time helping together by your prayer for us; so that for what has been given to us through a number of persons, praise may go up to God for us from all of them.
For our glory is in this, in the knowledge which we have that our way of life in the world, and most of all in relation to you, has been holy and true in the eyes of God; not in the wisdom of the flesh, but in the grace of God.
For in our letters we say no other things to you, but those which you are reading, and to which you give agreement, and, it is my hope, will go on doing so to the end:
Even as you have been ready, in part, to say that we are your glory, in the same way that you are ours, in the day of the Lord Jesus.
And being certain of this, it was my purpose to come to you before, so that you might have a second grace;
And by way of Corinth to go into Macedonia, and from there to come back again to you, so that you might send me on my way to Judaea.
If then I had such a purpose, did I seem to be changing suddenly? or am I guided in my purposes by the flesh, saying, Yes, today, and, No, tomorrow?
As God is true, our word to you is not Yes and No.
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, whom we were preaching among you, even I and Silvanus and Timothy, was not Yes and No, but in him is Yes.
For he is the Yes to all the undertakings of God: and by him all the words of God are made certain and put into effect, to the glory of God through us.
Now he who makes our faith strong together with you, in Christ, and has given us of his grace, is God;
And it is he who has put his stamp on us, even the Spirit, as the sign in our hearts of the coming glory.
But God is my witness that it was in pity for you that I did not come to Corinth at that time.
Not that we have authority over your faith, but we are helpers of your joy: for it is faith which is your support.
But it was my decision for myself, not to come again to you with sorrow.
For if I give you sorrow, who then will make me glad, but he who is made sad by me?
And I said this very thing in my letter, for fear that when I came I might have sorrow from those from whom it was right for me to have joy; being certain of this, that my joy is the joy of you all.
For out of much trouble and pain of heart and much weeping I sent my letter to you; not to give you sorrow, but so that you might see how great is the love which I have to you.
But if anyone has been a cause of sorrow, he has been so, not to me only, but in some measure to all of you (I say this that I may not be over-hard on you).
Let it be enough for such a man to have undergone the punishment which the church put on him;
So that now, on the other hand, it is right for him to have forgiveness and comfort from you, for fear that his sorrow may be over-great.
For which cause my desire is that you will make your love to him clear by your acts.
And for the same reason I sent you a letter so that I might be certain of your desire to do my orders in all things.
But if you give forgiveness to anyone, I do the same: for if I have given forgiveness for anything, I have done it because of you, in the person of Christ;
So that Satan may not get the better of us: for we are not without knowledge of his designs.
Now when I came to Troas for the good news of Christ, and there was an open door for me in the Lord,
I had no rest in my spirit because Titus my brother was not there: so I went away from them, and came into Macedonia.
But praise be to God who makes us strong to overcome in Christ, and makes clear through us in every place the value of the knowledge of him.
For we are a sweet perfume of Christ to God in those who are getting salvation and in those who are going to destruction;
To the one it is a perfume of death to death; to the other a perfume of life to life. And who is enough for such things?
For we are not like the great number who make use of the word of God for profit: but our words are true, as from God, being said as before God in Christ.
Do we seem to be again attempting to put ourselves in the right? or have we need, as some have, of letters of approval to you or from you?
You yourselves are our letter, whose writing is in our heart, open for every man's reading and knowledge;
For you are clearly a letter of Christ, the fruit of our work, recorded not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in stone, but in hearts of flesh.
And this is the certain faith which we have in God through Christ:
Not as if we were able by ourselves to do anything for which we might take the credit; but our power comes from God;
Who has made us able to be servants of a new agreement; not of the letter, but of the Spirit: for the letter gives death, but the Spirit gives life.
For if the operation of the law, giving death, recorded in letters on stone, came with glory, so that the eyes of the children of Israel had to be turned away from the face of Moses because of its glory, a glory which was only for a time:
Will not the operation of the Spirit have a much greater glory?
For if the operation of the law, producing punishment, had its glory, how much greater will be the operation of the Spirit causing righteousness?
For the glory of the first no longer seems to be glory, because of the greater glory of that which comes after.
For if the order which was for a time had its glory, much more will the eternal order have its glory.
Having then such a hope, we keep nothing back,
And are not like Moses, who put a veil on his face, so that the children of Israel might not see clearly to the end of the present order of things:
But their minds were made hard: for to this very day at the reading of the old agreement the same veil is still unlifted; though it is taken away in Christ.
But to this day, at the reading of the law of Moses, a veil is over their heart.
But when it is turned to the Lord, the veil will be taken away.
Now the Lord is the Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there the heart is free.
But we all, with unveiled face giving back as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as from the Lord who is the Spirit.
For this reason, because we have been made servants of this new order, through the mercy given to us, we are strong:
And we have given up the secret things of shame, not walking in false ways, and not making use of the word of God with deceit; but by the revelation of what is true, as before God, we have the approval of every man's sense of right and wrong.
But if our good news is veiled, it is veiled from those who are on the way to destruction:
Because the god of this world has made blind the minds of those who have not faith, so that the light of the good news of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, might not be shining on them.
For our preaching is not about ourselves, but about Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your servants through Jesus.
Seeing that it is God who said, Let light be shining out of the dark, who has put in our hearts the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
But we have this wealth in vessels of earth, so that it may be seen that the power comes not from us but from God;
Troubles are round us on every side, but we are not shut in; things are hard for us, but we see a way out of them;
We are cruelly attacked, but not without hope; we are made low, but we are not without help;
In our bodies there is ever the mark of the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may be seen in our bodies.
For, while living, we are still being given up to death because of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may be seen in our flesh, though it is under the power of death.
So then, death is working in us, but life in you.
But having the same spirit of faith, as it is said in the Writings, The words of my mouth came from the faith in my heart; in the same way, our words are the outcome of our faith;
Because we are certain that he who made the Lord Jesus come back from the dead, will do the same for us, and will give us a place in his glory with you.
For we go through all things on account of you, because the greater the number to whom the grace is given, the greater is the praise to the glory of God.
For which cause we do not give way to weariness; but though our outer man is getting feebler, our inner man is made new day by day.
For our present trouble, which is only for a short time, is working out for us a much greater weight of glory;
While our minds are not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are for a time; but the things which are not seen are eternal.
For we are conscious that if this our tent of flesh is taken down, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal, in heaven.
For in this we are crying in weariness, greatly desiring to be clothed with our house from heaven:
So that our spirits may not be unclothed.
For truly, we who are in this tent do give out cries of weariness, for the weight of care which is on us; not because we are desiring to be free from the body, but so that we may have our new body, and death may be overcome by life.
Now he who has made us for this very thing is God, who has given us the Spirit as a witness of what is to come.
So, then, we are ever without fear, and though conscious that while we are in the body we are away from the Lord,
(For we are walking by faith, not by seeing,)
We are without fear, desiring to be free from the body, and to be with the Lord.
For this reason we make it our purpose, in the body or away from it, to be well-pleasing to him.
For we all have to come before Christ to be judged; so that every one of us may get his reward for the things done in the body, good or bad.
Having in mind, then, the fear of the Lord, we put these things before men, but God sees our hearts; and it is my hope that we may seem right in your eyes.
We are not again requesting your approval, but we are giving you the chance of taking pride in us, so that you may be able to give an answer to those whose glory is in seeming, and not in the heart.
For if we are foolish, it is to God; or if we are serious, it is for you.
For it is the love of Christ which is moving us; because we are of the opinion that if one was put to death for all, then all have undergone death;
And that he underwent death for all, so that the living might no longer be living to themselves, but to him who underwent death for them and came back from the dead.
For this reason, from this time forward we have knowledge of no man after the flesh: even if we have had knowledge of Christ after the flesh, we have no longer any such knowledge.
So if any man is in Christ, he is in a new world: the old things have come to an end; they have truly become new.
But all things are of God, who has made us at peace with himself through Christ, and has given to us the work of making peace;
That is, that God was in Christ making peace between the world and himself, not putting their sins to their account, and having given to us the preaching of this news of peace.
So we are the representatives of Christ, as if God was making a request to you through us: we make our request to you, in the name of Christ, be at peace with God.
For him who had no knowledge of sin God made to be sin for us; so that we might become the righteousness of God in him.
We then, working together with God, make our request to you not to take the grace of God to no purpose.
(For he says, I have given ear to you at a good time, and I have been your helper in a day of salvation: see, now is the good time; now is the day of salvation):
Giving no cause for trouble in anything, so that no one may be able to say anything against our work;
But in everything making it clear that we are the servants of God, in quiet strength, in troubles, in need, in sorrow,
In blows, in prisons, in attacks, in hard work, in watchings, in going without food;
In a clean heart, in knowledge, in long waiting, in being kind, in the Holy Spirit, in true love,
In the true word, in the power of God; with the arms of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,
By glory and by shame, by an evil name and a good name; as untrue, and still true;
Unnoted, but still kept fully in mind; as near to death, but still living; as undergoing punishment, but not put to death;
As full of sorrow, but ever glad; as poor, but giving wealth to others; as having nothing, but still having all things.
Our mouth is open to you, O Corinthians, our heart is wide.
It is not our feelings to you which are narrow, but yours to us.
Now to give me back payment of the same sort (I am talking as to my children), let your hearts be wide open to me.
Do not keep company with those who have not faith: for what is there in common between righteousness and evil, or between light and dark?
And what agreement is there between Christ and the Evil One? or what part has one who has faith with one who has not?
And what agreement has the house of God with images? for we are a house of the living God; even as God has said, I will be living among them, and walking with them; and I will be their God, and they will be my people.
For which cause, Come out from among them, and be separate, says the Lord, and let no unclean thing come near you; and I will take you for myself,
And will be a Father to you; and you will be my sons and daughters, says the Lord, the Ruler of all.
Because God, then, will give us such rewards, dear brothers, let us make ourselves clean from all evil of flesh and spirit, and become completely holy in the fear of God.
Let your hearts be open to us: we have done no man wrong, no man has been damaged by us, we have made no profit out of any man,
It is not with the purpose of judging you that I say this: for I have said before that you are in our hearts for life and death together.
My words to you are without fear, I am full of pride on account of you: I have great comfort and joy in all our troubles.
For even when we had come into Macedonia our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side; there were fightings outside and fears inside.
But God who gives comfort to the poor in spirit gave us comfort by the coming of Titus;
And not by his coming only, but by the comfort which he had in you, while he gave us word of your desire, your sorrow, your care for me; so that I was still more glad.
For though my letter gave you pain, I have no regret for it now, though I had before; for I see that the letter gave you pain, but only for a time.
Now I am glad, not that you had sorrow, but that your sorrow was the cause of a change of heart; for yours was a holy sorrow so that you might undergo no loss by us in anything.
For the sorrow which God gives is the cause of salvation through a change of heart, in which there is no reason for grief: but the sorrow of the world is a cause of death.
For you see what care was produced in you by this very sorrow of yours before God, what clearing of yourselves, what wrath against sin, what fear, what desire, what serious purpose, what punishment. In everything you have made it clear that you are free from sin in this business.
So though I sent you a letter, it was not only because of the man who did the wrong, or because of him to whom the wrong was done, but so that your true care for us might be made clear in the eyes of God.
So we have been comforted: and we had the greater joy in our comfort because of the joy of Titus, for his spirit had been made glad by you all.
For I was not put to shame in anything in which I may have made clear to him my pride in you; but as we said nothing to you but what was true, so the good things which I said to Titus about you were seen by him to be true.
And his love to you is the more increased by his memory of you all, how you gave way to his authority, and how you took him to your hearts with fear and honour.
It gives me great joy to see you answering to my good opinion of you in every way.
And now we give you news, brothers, about the grace of God which has been given to the churches of Macedonia;
How while they were undergoing every sort of trouble, and were in the greatest need, they took all the greater joy in being able to give freely to the needs of others.
For I give them witness, that as they were able, and even more than they were able, they gave from the impulse of their hearts,
Seriously requesting us that they might have a part in this grace of being servants to the needs of the saints:
And going even farther than our hope, they first gave themselves to the Lord and to us after the purpose of God.
So that we made a request to Titus that, as he had made a start before, so he might make this grace complete in you.
And that as you are full of every good thing, of faith, of the word, of knowledge, of a ready mind, and of love to us, so you may be full of this grace in the same way.
I am not giving you an order, but using the ready mind of others as a test of the quality of your love.
For you see the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, how though he had wealth, he became poor on your account, so that through his need you might have wealth.
And in this I give my opinion: for it is to your profit, who were the first to make a start a year before, not only to do this, but to make clear that your minds were more than ready to do it.
Then make the doing of it complete; so that as you had a ready mind, you may give effect to it as you are able.
For if there is a ready mind, a man will have God's approval in the measure of what he has, and not of what he has not.
And I am not saying this so that others may get off free, while the weight comes on you:
But so that things may be equal; that from those things of which you have more than enough at the present time their need may be helped, and that if you are in any need they may be a help to you in the same way, making things equal.
As it says in the Writings, He who had taken up much had nothing over and he who had little had enough.
But praise be to God, who puts the same care for you into the heart of Titus.
For while he gladly gave ear to our request, he was interested enough to go to you from the impulse of his heart.
And with him we have sent a brother whose praise in the good news has gone through all the churches;
And not only so, but he was marked out by the churches to go with us in the grace of this giving which we have undertaken to the glory of the Lord and to make clear that our mind was ready:
And so that no man might be able to say anything against us in the business of this giving which has been put into our hands:
For the business has been so ordered by us as to have the approval, not only of the Lord, but of men.
And we have sent with them our brother, whose ready spirit has been made clear to us at times and in ways without number, but it is now all the more so because of the certain faith which he has in you.
If any question comes up about Titus, he is my brother-worker, working with me for you; or about the others, they are the representatives of the churches to the glory of Christ.
Make clear then to them, as representatives of the churches, the quality of your love, and that the things which we have said about you are true.
But there is no need for me to say anything in my letter about the giving to the saints:
For I have before made clear to those of Macedonia my pride in your ready mind, saying to them that Achaia has been ready for a year back; and a great number have been moved to do the same by your example.
But I have sent the brothers, so that the good things we said about you may be seen to be true, and that, as I said, you may be ready:
For fear that, if any from Macedonia come with me, and you are not ready, we (not to say, you) might be put to shame in this thing.
So it seemed to me wise for the brothers to go before, and see that the amount which you had undertaken to give was ready, so that it might be a cause for praise, and not as if we were making profit out of you.
But in the Writings it says, He who puts in only a small number of seeds, will get in the same; and he who puts them in from a full hand, will have produce in full measure from them.
Let every man do after the purpose of his heart; not giving with grief, or by force: for God takes pleasure in a ready giver.
And God is able to give you all grace in full measure; so that ever having enough of all things, you may be full of every good work:
As it is said in the Writings, He has sent out far and wide, he has given to the poor; his righteousness is for ever.
And he who gives seed for putting into the field and bread for food, will take care of the growth of your seed, at the same time increasing the fruits of your righteousness;
Your wealth being increased in everything, with a simple mind, causing praise to God through us.
For this work of giving not only takes care of the needs of the saints, but is the cause of much praise to God;
For when, through this work of giving, they see what you are, they give glory to God for the way in which you have given yourselves to the good news of Christ, and for the wealth of your giving to them and to all;
While their hearts go out to you in love and in prayer for you, because of the great grace of God which is in you.
Praise be to God for what he has given, which words have no power to say.
Now I, Paul, myself make request to you by the quiet and gentle behaviour of Christ, I who am poor in spirit when with you, but who say what is in my mind to you without fear when I am away from you:
Yes, I make my request to you, so that when I am with you I may not have to make use of the authority which may be needed against some to whom we seem to be walking after the flesh.
For though we may be living in the flesh, we are not fighting after the way of the flesh
(For the arms with which we are fighting are not those of the flesh, but are strong before God for the destruction of high places);
Putting an end to reasonings, and every high thing which is lifted up against the knowledge of God, and causing every thought to come under the authority of Christ;
Being ready to give punishment to whatever is against his authority, after you have made it clear that you are completely under his control.
Give attention to the things which are before you. If any man seems to himself to be Christ's, let him keep in mind that we are as much Christ's as he is.
For though I might take pride in our authority (which the Lord gave for building you up, and not for your destruction), it will not be a cause of shame to me:
That I may not seem to have the desire of causing you fear by my letters.
For his letters, they say, have weight and are strong; but in body he is feeble, and his way of talking has little force.
Let those who say this keep in mind that, what we are in word by letters when we are away, so will we be in act when we are present.
For we will not make comparison of ourselves with some of those who say good things about themselves: but these, measuring themselves by themselves, and making comparison of themselves with themselves, are not wise.
We will not give glory to ourselves in over-great measure, but after the measure of the rule which God has given us, a measure which comes even to you.
For we have no need to make ourselves seem more than we are, as if our authority did not come as far as to you: for we came even as far as you with the good news of Christ:
Not taking credit to ourselves for what is not our business, that is, for the work of others; but having hope that, with the growth of your faith, we may get the credit for an increase which is the effect of our work,
So that we may be able to go on and take the good news to countries still farther away than you are, and not take credit for another man's work in making things ready to our hand.
But whoever has a desire for glory, let his glory be in the Lord.
For the Lord's approval of a man is not dependent on his opinion of himself, but on the Lord's opinion of him.
Put up with me if I am a little foolish: but, truly, you do put up with me.
For I have a very great care for you: because you have been married by me to one husband, and it is my desire to give you completely holy to Christ.
But I have a fear, that in some way, as Eve was tricked by the deceit of the snake, your minds may be turned away from their simple and holy love for Christ.
For if anyone comes preaching another Jesus from the one whose preachers we are, or if you have got a different spirit, or a different sort of good news from those which came to you, how well you put up with these things.
For in my opinion, I am in no way less than the most important of the Apostles.
But though I am rough in my way of talking, I am not so in knowledge, as we have made clear to all by our acts among you.
Or did I do wrong in making myself low so that you might be lifted up, because I gave you the good news of God without reward?
I took money from other churches as payment for my work, so that I might be your servant;
And when I was present with you, and was in need, I let no man be responsible for me; for the brothers, when they came from Macedonia, gave me whatever was needed; and in everything I kept myself from being a trouble to you, and I will go on doing so.
As the true word of Christ is in me, I will let no man take from me this my cause of pride in the country of Achaia.
Why? because I have no love for you? let God be judge.
But what I do, that I will go on doing, so that I may give no chance to those who are looking for one; so that, in the cause of their pride, they may be seen to be the same as we are.
For such men are false Apostles, workers of deceit, making themselves seem like Apostles of Christ.
And it is no wonder; for even Satan himself is able to take the form of an angel of light.
So it is no great thing if his servants make themselves seem to be servants of righteousness; whose end will be the reward of their works.
I say again, Let me not seem foolish to anyone; but if I do, put up with me as such, so that I may take a little glory to myself.
What I am now saying is not by the order of the Lord, but as a foolish person, taking credit to myself, as it seems.
Seeing that there are those who take credit to themselves after the flesh, I will do the same.
For you put up with the foolish gladly, being wise yourselves.
You put up with a man if he makes servants of you, if he makes profit out of you, if he makes you prisoners, if he puts himself in a high place, if he gives you blows on the face.
I say this by way of shaming ourselves, as if we had been feeble. But if anyone puts himself forward (I am talking like a foolish person), I will do the same.
Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they of Israel? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I.
Are they servants of Christ? (I am talking foolishly) I am more so; I have had more experience of hard work, of prisons, of blows more than measure, of death.
Five times the Jews gave me forty blows but one.
Three times I was whipped with rods, once I was stoned, three times the ship I was in came to destruction at sea, a night and a day I have been in the water;
In frequent travels, in dangers on rivers, in dangers from outlaws, in dangers from my countrymen, in dangers from the Gentiles, in dangers in the town, in dangers in the waste land, in dangers at sea, in dangers among false brothers;
In hard work and weariness, in frequent watchings, going without food and drink, cold and in need of clothing.
In addition to all the other things, there is that which comes on me every day, the care of all the churches.
Who is feeble and I am not feeble? who is in danger of falling, and I am not angry?
If I have to take credit to myself, I will do so in the things in which I am feeble.
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever, is witness that the things which I say are true.
In Damascus, the ruler under Aretas the king kept watch over the town of the people of Damascus, in order to take me:
And being let down in a basket from the wall through a window, I got free from his hands.
As it is necessary for me to take glory to myself, though it is not a good thing, I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.
I have knowledge of a man in Christ, fourteen years back (if he was in the body, or out of the body, I am not able to say, but God only), who was taken up to the third heaven.
And I have knowledge of such a man (if he was in the body, or out of the body, I am not able to say, but God only),
How he was taken up into Paradise, and words came to his ears which may not be said, and which man is not able to say.
On account of such a one I will have glory: for myself I will take no glory, but only in my feeble body.
For if I had a desire to take credit to myself, it would not be foolish, for I would be saying what is true: but I will not, for fear that I might seem to any man more than he sees me to be, or has word from me that I am.
And because the revelations were so very great, in order that I might not be overmuch lifted up, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, one sent from Satan to give me pain.
And about this thing I made request to the Lord three times that it might be taken away from me.
And he said to me, My grace is enough for you, for my power is made complete in what is feeble. Most gladly, then, will I take pride in my feeble body, so that the power of Christ may be on me.
So I take pleasure in being feeble, in unkind words, in needs, in cruel attacks, in troubles, on account of Christ: for when I am feeble, then am I strong.
I have been forced by you to become foolish, though it was right for my praise to have come from you: for in no way was I less than the chief of the Apostles, though I am nothing.
Truly the signs of an Apostle were done among you in quiet strength, with wonders and acts of power.
For what is there in which you were made less than the other churches, but in the one thing that I was not a trouble to you? Let me have forgiveness for this wrong.
This is now the third time that I am ready to come to you; and I will not be a trouble to you: my desire is for you, not for your property: for it is not the children's business to make store for their fathers, but the fathers for the children.
And I will gladly give all I have for your souls. If I have the more love for you, am I to be loved the less?
But let it be so, that I was not a trouble to you myself; but (someone may say) being false, I took you with deceit.
Did I make a profit out of you by any of those whom I sent to you?
I gave orders to Titus, and I sent the brother with him. Did Titus make any profit out of you? were we not guided by the same Spirit, in the same ways?
It may seem to you that all this time we have been attempting to put ourselves in the right; but we are saying these things before God in Christ. For all things, dear brothers, are for your profit.
For I have a fear that, when I come, you may not be answering to my desire, and that I may not be answering to yours; that there may be fighting, hate, angry feeling, divisions, evil talk about others, secrets, thoughts of pride, outbursts against authority;
And that when I come again, my God may put me to shame among you, and I may have grief for those who have done wrong before and have had no regret for their unclean ways, and for the evil desires of the flesh to which they have given way.
This is the third time that I am coming to you. From the mouth of two or three witnesses will every word be made certain.
I said before, and still say it before I come, as being present for the second time, though I am still away from you, to those who have done wrong before, and to all the others, that if I come again I will not have pity;
Seeing that you are looking for a sign of Christ giving out his word in me; who is not feeble in relation to you, but is strong in you:
For he was feeble in that he was put to death on the cross, but he is living by the power of God. And we are feeble in him, but we will be living with him through the power of God in relation to you.
Make a test of yourselves, if you are in the faith; make certain of yourselves. Or are you not conscious in yourselves that Jesus Christ is in you, if you are truly Christ's?
But it is my hope that you will have no doubt that we are truly Christ's.
Now our prayer to God is that you may do no evil; not in order that it may be put to our credit, but so that you may do what is right, whatever we may seem.
Because we are able to do nothing against what is true, but only for it.
For we are glad when we are feeble and you are strong: and this is our prayer, even that you may be made complete.
For this cause I am writing these things while I am away, so that there may be need for me, when I am present, to make use of sharp measures, by the authority which the Lord has given me for building up and not for destruction.
Let this be my last word, brothers; be glad; be complete; be comforted; be of the same mind; be at peace with one another: and the God of love and peace will be with you.
Give one another a holy kiss.
All the saints send their love to you.
Paul, an Apostle (not from men, and not through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who made him come back from the dead),
And all the brothers who are with me, to the churches of Galatia:
Grace to you and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ,
Who gave himself for our sins, so that he might make us free from this present evil world, after the purpose of our God and Father:
To whom be the glory for ever and ever. So be it.
I am surprised that you are being so quickly turned away from him whose word came to you in the grace of Christ, to good news of a different sort;
Which is not another sort: only there are some who give you trouble, desiring to make changes in the good news of Christ.
But even if we, or an angel from heaven, were to be a preacher to you of good news other than that which we have given you, let there be a curse on him.
As we have said before, so say I now again, If any man is a preacher to you of any good news other than that which has been given to you, let there be a curse on him.
Am I now using arguments to men, or God? or is it my desire to give men pleasure? if I was still pleasing men, I would not be a servant of Christ.
Because I say to you, my brothers, that the good news of which I was the preacher is not man's.
For I did not get it from man, and I was not given teaching in it, but it came to me through revelation of Jesus Christ.
For news has come to you of my way of life in the past in the Jews' religion, how I was cruel without measure to the church of God, and did great damage to it:
And I went farther in the Jews' religion than a number of my generation among my countrymen, having a more burning interest in the beliefs handed down from my fathers.
But when it was the good pleasure of God, by whom I was marked out even from my mother's body, through his grace,
To give the revelation of his Son in me, so that I might give the news of him to the Gentiles; then I did not take the opinion of flesh and blood,
And I went not up to Jerusalem to those who were Apostles before me; but I went away into Arabia, and again I came back to Damascus.
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Cephas, and was there with him fifteen days.
But of the other Apostles I saw only James, the Lord's brother.
Now God is witness that the things which I am writing to you are true.
Then I came to the parts of Syria and Cilicia.
And the churches of Judaea which were in Christ still had no knowledge of my face or person:
Only it came to their ears that he who at one time was cruel to us is now preaching the faith which before had been attacked by him;
And they gave glory to God in me.
Then after the space of fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus with me.
And I went up by revelation; and I put before them the good news which I was preaching among the Gentiles, but privately before those who were of good name, so that the work which I was or had been doing might not be without effect.
But not even Titus who was with me, being a Greek, was made to undergo circumcision:
And that because of the false brothers let in secretly, who came searching out our free condition which we have in Christ Jesus, so that they might make servants of us;
To whom we gave way not even for an hour; so that the true words of the good news might still be with you.
But from those who seemed to be important (whatever they were has no weight with me: God does not take man's person into account): those who seemed to be important gave nothing new to me;
But, quite the opposite, when they saw that I had been made responsible for preaching the good news to those without circumcision, even as Peter had been for those of the circumcision
(Because he who was working in Peter as the Apostle of the circumcision was working no less in me among the Gentiles);
When they saw the grace which was given to me, James and Cephas and John, who had the name of being pillars, gave to me and Barnabas their right hands as friends so that we might go to the Gentiles, and they to the circumcision;
Only it was their desire that we would give thought to the poor; which very thing I had much in mind to do.
But when Cephas came to Antioch, I made a protest against him to his face, because he was clearly in the wrong.
For before certain men came from James, he did take food with the Gentiles: but when they came, he went back and made himself separate, fearing those who were of the circumcision.
And the rest of the Jews went after him, so that even Barnabas was overcome by their false ways.
But when I saw that they were not living uprightly in agreement with the true words of the good news, I said to Cephas before them all, If you, being a Jew, are living like the Gentiles, and not like the Jews, how will you make the Gentiles do the same as the Jews?
We being Jews by birth, and not sinners of the Gentiles,
Being conscious that a man does not get righteousness by the works of the law, but through faith in Jesus Christ, we had faith in Christ Jesus, so that we might get righteousness by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the law: because by the works of the law will no flesh get righteousness.
But if, while we were desiring to get righteousness through Christ, we ourselves were seen to be sinners, is Christ a servant of sin? In no way!
For if I put up again those things which I gave to destruction, I am seen to be a wrongdoer.
For I, through the law, have become dead to the law, so that I might be living to God.
I have been put to death on the cross with Christ; still I am living; no longer I, but Christ is living in me; and that life which I now am living in the flesh I am living by faith, the faith of the Son of God, who in love for me, gave himself up for me.
I do not make the grace of God of no effect: because if righteousness is through the law, then Christ was put to death for nothing.
O foolish Galatians, by what strange powers have you been tricked, to whom it was made clear that Jesus Christ was put to death on the cross?
Give me an answer to this one question, Did the Spirit come to you through the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?
Are you so foolish? having made a start in the Spirit, will you now be made complete in the flesh?
Did you undergo such a number of things to no purpose? if it is in fact to no purpose.
He who gives you the Spirit, and does works of power among you, is it by the works of law, or by the hearing of faith?
Even as Abraham had faith in God, and it was put to his account as righteousness.
Be certain, then, that those who are of faith, the same are sons of Abraham.
And the holy Writings, seeing before the event that God would give the Gentiles righteousness by faith, gave the good news before to Abraham, saying, In you will all the nations have a blessing.
So then those who are of faith have a part in the blessing of Abraham who was full of faith.
For all who are of the works of the law are under a curse: because it is said in the Writings, A curse is on everyone who does not keep on doing all the things which are ordered in the book of the law.
Now that no man gets righteousness by the law in the eyes of God, is clear; because, The upright will be living by faith.
And the law is not of faith; but, He who does them will have life by them.
Christ has made us free from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us: because it is said in the Writings, A curse on everyone who is put to death by hanging on a tree:
So that on the Gentiles might come the blessing of Abraham in Christ Jesus; in order that we through faith might have the Spirit which God had undertaken to give.
Brothers, as men would say, even a man's agreement, when it has been made certain, may not be put on one side, or have additions made to it.
Now to Abraham were the undertakings given, and to his seed. He says not, And to seeds, as of a great number; but as of one, he says, And to your seed, which is Christ.
Now this I say: The law, which came four hundred and thirty years after, does not put an end to the agreement made before by God, so as to make the undertaking without effect.
Because if the heritage is by the law, it is no longer dependent on the word of God; but God gave it to Abraham by his word.
What then is the law? It was an addition made because of sin, till the coming of the seed to whom the undertaking had been given; and it was ordered through angels by the hand of a go-between.
Now a go-between is not a go-between of one; but God is one.
Is the law then against the words of God? in no way; because if there had been a law which was able to give life, truly righteousness would have been by the law.
However, the holy Writings have put all things under sin, so that that for which God gave the undertaking, based on faith in Jesus Christ, might be given to those who have such faith.
But before faith came, we were kept in prison under the law, waiting for the revelation of the faith which was to come.
So the law has been a servant to take us to Christ, so that we might have righteousness by faith.
But now that faith is come, we are no longer under a servant.
Because you are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus.
For all those of you who were given baptism into Christ did put on Christ.
There is no Jew or Greek, servant or free, male or female: because you are all one in Jesus Christ.
And if you are Christ's, then you are Abraham's seed, and yours is the heritage by the right of God's undertaking given to Abraham.
But I say that as long as the son is a child, he is in no way different from a servant, though he is lord of all;
But is under keepers and managers till the time fixed by the father.
So we, when we were young, were kept under the first rules of the world;
But when the time had come, God sent out his Son, made of a woman, made under the law,
That he might make them free who were under the law, and that we might be given the place of sons.
And because you are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, saying, Abba, Father.
So that you are no longer a servant, but a son; and if a son, then the heritage of God is yours.
But at that time, having no knowledge of God, you were servants to those who by right are no gods:
But now that you have come to have knowledge of God, or more truly, God has knowledge of you, how is it that you go back again to the poor and feeble first things, desiring to be servants to them again?
You keep days, and months, and fixed times, and years.
I am in fear of you, that I may have been working for you to no purpose.
My desire for you, brothers, is that you may be as I am, because I am as you are. You have done me no wrong;
But you have knowledge that with a feeble body I was preaching the good news to you the first time;
And you did not have a poor opinion of me because of the trouble in my flesh, or put shame on it; but you took me to your hearts as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.
Where then is that happy condition of yours? because I give you witness, that, if possible, you would have taken out your eyes and given them to me.
So then am I no longer your friend, because I give you true words?
Their interest in you is not good; but their desire is that you may be shut out, so that you may go after them.
But it is good to have an interest in a good cause at all times, and not only when I am present with you.
My children, of whom I am again in birth-pains till Christ is formed in you,
Truly my desire is to be present with you now, using a changed voice; for I am troubled about you.
Say, you whose desire it is to be under the law, do you not give ear to the law?
Because it is in the Writings, that Abraham had two sons, one by the servant-woman, and one by the free woman.
Now the son by the servant-woman has his birth after the flesh; but the son by the free woman has his birth through the undertaking of God.
Which things have a secret sense; because these women are the two agreements; one from the mountain of Sinai, giving birth to servants, which is Hagar.
Now this Hagar is the mountain Sinai in Arabia, and is the image of the Jerusalem which now is: which is a servant with her children.
But the Jerusalem on high is free, which is our mother.
For it is in the Writings, You who have never given birth, be glad; give cries of joy, you who have had no birth-pains; for the children of her who has been given up by her husband are more than those of the woman who has a husband.
Now we, brothers, as Isaac was, are the children of the undertaking of God.
But as in those days he who had birth after the flesh was cruel to him who had birth after the Spirit, even so it is now.
What then do the Writings say? Send away the servant-woman and her son; for the son of the servant-woman will not have a part in the heritage with the son of the free woman.
So, brothers, we are not children of the servant-woman, but of the free woman.
Christ has truly made us free: then keep your free condition and let no man put a yoke on you again.
See, I Paul say to you, that if you undergo circumcision, Christ will be of no use to you.
Yes, I give witness again to every man who undergoes circumcision, that he will have to keep all the law.
You are cut off from Christ, you who would have righteousness by the law; you are turned away from grace.
For we through the Spirit by faith are waiting for the hope of righteousness.
Because in Christ Jesus, having circumcision or not having circumcision are equally of no profit; but only faith working through love.
You were going on well; who was the cause of your not giving ear to what is true?
This ready belief did not come from him who had made you his.
A little leaven makes a change in all the mass.
I am certain about you in the Lord, that you will be of no other mind; but he who is troubling you will have his punishment, whoever he is.
But I, brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still attacked? then has the shame of the cross been taken away.
My desire is that they who give you trouble might even be cut off themselves.
Because you, brothers, were marked out to be free; only do not make use of your free condition to give the flesh its chance, but through love be servants one to another.
For all the law is made complete in one word, even in this, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself.
But if you are given to fighting with one another, take care that you are not the cause of destruction one to another.
But I say, Go on in the Spirit, and you will not come under the rule of the evil desires of the flesh.
For the flesh has desires against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; because these are opposite the one to the other; so that you may not do the things which you have a mind to do.
But if you are guided by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
Now the works of the flesh are clear, which are these: evil desire, unclean things, wrong use of the senses,
Worship of images, use of strange powers, hates, fighting, desire for what another has, angry feelings, attempts to get the better of others, divisions, false teachings,
Envy, uncontrolled drinking and feasting, and such things: of which I give you word clearly, even as I did in the past, that they who do such things will have no part in the kingdom of God.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, a quiet mind, kind acts, well-doing, faith,
Gentle behaviour, control over desires: against such there is no law.
And those who are Christ's have put to death on the cross the flesh with its passions and its evil desires.
If we are living by the Spirit, by the Spirit let us be guided.
Let us not be full of self-glory, making one another angry, having envy of one another.
Brothers, if a man is taken in any wrongdoing, you who are of the Spirit will put such a one right in a spirit of love; keeping watch on yourself, for fear that you yourself may be tested.
Take on yourselves one another's troubles, and so keep the law of Christ.
For if a man has an idea that he is something when he is nothing, he is tricked by himself.
But let every man make test of his work, and then will his cause for glory be in himself only, and not in his neighbour.
Because every man is responsible for his part of the work.
But let him who gets teaching in the word give a part in all good things to his teacher.
Be not tricked; God is not made sport of: for whatever seed a man puts in, that will he get back as grain.
Because he who puts in the seed of the flesh will of the flesh get the reward of death; but he who puts in the seed of the Spirit will of the Spirit get the reward of eternal life.
And let us not get tired of well-doing; for at the right time we will get in the grain, if we do not give way to weariness.
So then, as we have the chance, let us do good to all men, and specially to those who are of the family of the faith.
See the size of the handwriting which I myself have made use of in writing to you.
Those who have the desire to seem important in the flesh, put force on you to undergo circumcision; only that they may not be attacked because of the cross of Christ.
Because even those who undergo circumcision do not themselves keep the law; but they would have you undergo circumcision, so that they may have glory in your flesh.
But far be it from me to have glory in anything, but only in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which this world has come to an end on the cross for me, and I for it.
For having circumcision is nothing, and not having circumcision is nothing, but only a new order of existence.
And on all who are guided by this rule be peace and mercy, and on the Israel of God.
From this time on let no man be a trouble to me; because my body is marked with the marks of Jesus.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. So be it.
Paul, an Apostle of Christ Jesus by the purpose of God, to the saints who are at Ephesus, and those who have faith in Christ Jesus:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has given us every blessing of the Spirit in the heavens in Christ:
Even as he made selection of us in him from the first, so that we might be holy and free from all evil before him in love:
As we were designed before by him for the position of sons to himself, through Jesus Christ, in the good pleasure of his purpose,
To the praise of the glory of his grace, which he freely gave to us in the Loved One:
In whom we have salvation through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins, through the wealth of his grace,
Which he gave us in full measure in all wisdom and care;
Having made clear to us the secret of his purpose, in agreement with the design which he had in mind, to put into his hands
The ordering of the times when they are complete, so that all things might come to a head in Christ, the things in heaven and the things on the earth; in him, I say,
In whom we have a heritage, being marked out from the first in his purpose who does all things in agreement with his designs;
So that his glory might have praise through us who first had hope in Christ:
In whom you, having been given the true word, the good news of your salvation, and through your faith in him, were given the sign of the Holy Spirit of hope,
Which is the first-fruit of our heritage, till God gets back that which is his, to the praise of his glory.
For this cause I, having had news of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is among you, and which you make clear to all the saints,
Give praise without end for you, keeping you in mind in my prayers;
That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him;
And that having the eyes of your heart full of light, you may have knowledge of what is the hope of his purpose, what is the wealth of the glory of his heritage in the saints,
And how unlimited is his power to us who have faith, as is seen in the working of the strength of his power,
By which he made Christ come back from the dead, and gave him a place at his right hand in heaven,
Far over all rule and authority and power and every name which is named, not only in the present order, but in that which is to come:
And he has put all things under his feet, and has made him to be head over all things to the church,
Which is his body, the full measure of him in whom all things are made complete.
And to you did he give life, when you were dead through your wrongdoing and sins,
In which you were living in the past, after the ways of this present world, doing the pleasure of the lord of the power of the air, the spirit who is now working in those who go against the purpose of God;
Among whom we all at one time were living in the pleasures of our flesh, giving way to the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and the punishment of God was waiting for us even as for the rest.
But God, being full of mercy, through the great love which he had for us,
Even when we were dead through our sins, gave us life together with Christ (by grace you have salvation),
So that we came back from death with him, and are seated with him in the heavens, in Christ Jesus;
That in the time to come he might make clear the full wealth of his grace in his mercy to us in Christ Jesus:
Because by grace you have salvation through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is given by God:
Not by works, so that no man may take glory to himself.
For by his act we were given existence in Christ Jesus to do those good works which God before made ready for us so that we might do them.
For this reason keep it in mind that in the past you, the Gentiles in the flesh, who are looked on as being outside the circumcision by those who have circumcision, in the flesh, made by hands;
That you were at that time without Christ, being cut off from any part in Israel's rights as a nation, having no part in God's agreement, having no hope, and without God in the world.
But now in Christ Jesus you who at one time were far off are made near in the blood of Christ.
For he is our peace, who has made the two into one, and by whom the middle wall of division has been broken down,
Having in his flesh put an end to that which made the division between us, even the law with its rules and orders, so that he might make in himself, of the two, one new man, so making peace;
And that the two might come into agreement with God in one body through the cross, so putting an end to that division.
And he came preaching peace to you who were far off, and to those who were near;
Because through him the two of us are able to come near in one Spirit to the Father.
So then you are no longer as those who have no part or place in the kingdom of God, but you are numbered among the saints, and of the family of God,
Resting on the base of the Apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief keystone,
In whom all the building, rightly joined together, comes to be a holy house of God in the Lord;
In whom you, with the rest, are united together as a living-place of God in the Spirit.
For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for you Gentiles,
If that ordering of the grace of God has come to your knowledge, which was given to me for you,
How by revelation the secret was made clear to me, as I said before in a short letter,
By the reading of which you will be clear about my knowledge of the secret of Christ;
Which in other generations was not given to the sons of men, but the revelation of it has now been made to his holy Apostles and prophets in the Spirit;
Which is that the Gentiles have a part in the heritage, and in the same body, and in the same hope in Christ through the good news,
Of which I was made a preacher, through that grace of God which was given to me in the measure of the working of his power.
To me, who am less than the least of all the saints, was this grace given, so that I might make clear to the Gentiles the good news of the unending wealth of Christ:
And make all men see what is the ordering of the secret which from the first has been kept in God who made all things;
So that now to the rulers and the authorities in the heavens might be made clear through the church the wide-shining wisdom of God,
Which is seen in his eternal purpose in Christ Jesus our Lord:
By whom we come near to God without fear through faith in him.
For this reason it is my prayer that you may not become feeble because of my troubles for you, which are your glory.
For this cause I go down on my knees before the Father,
From whom every family in heaven and on earth is named,
That in the wealth of his glory he would make you strong with power through his Spirit in your hearts;
So that Christ may have his place in your hearts through faith; and that you, being rooted and based in love,
May have strength to see with all the saints how wide and long and high and deep it is,
And to have knowledge of the love of Christ which is outside all knowledge, so that you may be made complete as God himself is complete.
Now to him who is able to do in full measure more than all our desires or thoughts, through the power which is working in us,
To him be the glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations for ever and ever. So be it.
I then, the prisoner in the Lord, make this request from my heart, that you will see that your behaviour is a credit to the position which God's purpose has given you,
With all gentle and quiet behaviour, taking whatever comes, putting up with one another in love;
Taking care to keep the harmony of the Spirit in the yoke of peace.
There is one body and one Spirit, even as you have been marked out by God in the one hope of his purpose for you;
One Lord, one faith, one baptism,
One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in all.
But to every one of us has grace been given in the measure of the giving of Christ.
For this reason he says, He went up on high, taking his prisoners with him, and gave freely to men.
(Now this, He went up, what is it but that he first went down into the lower parts of the earth?
He who went down is the same who went up far over all the heavens so that he might make all things complete.)
And he gave some as Apostles, and some, prophets; and some, preachers of the good news; and some to give care and teaching;
For the training of the saints as servants in the church, for the building up of the body of Christ:
Till we all come to the harmony of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to full growth, to the full measure of Christ:
So that we may be no longer children, sent this way and that, turned about by every wind of teaching, by the twisting and tricks of men, by the deceits of error;
But saying true words in love, may come to full growth in him, who is the head, even Christ;
Through whom all the body, being rightly formed and united together, by the full working of every part, is increased to the building up of itself in love.
This I say, then, and give witness in the Lord, that you are to go no longer in the way of the Gentiles whose minds are turned to that which has no profit,
Whose thoughts are dark, to whom the life of God is strange because they are without knowledge, and their hearts have been made hard;
Who having no more power of feeling, have given themselves up to evil passions, to do all unclean things with overmuch desire.
For this was not the teaching of Christ which was given to you;
If in fact you gave ear to him, and were given teaching in him, even as what is true is made clear in Jesus:
That you are to put away, in relation to your earlier way of life, the old man, which has become evil by love of deceit;
And be made new in the spirit of your mind,
And put on the new man, to which God has given life, in righteousness and a true and holy way of living.
And so, putting away false words, let everyone say what is true to his neighbour: for we are parts one of another.
Be angry without doing wrong; let not the sun go down on your wrath;
And do not give way to the Evil One.
Let him who was a thief be so no longer, but let him do good work with his hands, so that he may have something to give to him who is in need.
Let no evil talk come out of your mouth, but only what is good for giving necessary teaching, and for grace to those who give ear.
And do not give grief to the Holy Spirit of God, by whom you were marked for the day of salvation.
Let all bitter, sharp and angry feeling, and noise, and evil words, be put away from you, with all unkind acts;
And be kind to one another, full of pity, having forgiveness for one another, even as God in Christ had forgiveness for you.
Let it then be your desire to be like God, as well-loved children;
And be living in love, even as Christ had love for you, and gave himself up for us, an offering to God for a perfume of a sweet smell.
But evil acts of the flesh and all unclean things, or desire for others' property, let it not even be named among you, as is right for saints;
And let there be no low behaviour, or foolish talk, or words said in sport, which are not right, but in place of them the giving of praise.
Being certain of this, that no man who gives way to the passions of the flesh, no unclean person, or one who has desire for the property of others, or who gives worship to images, has any heritage in the kingdom of Christ and God.
Do not be turned from the right way by foolish words; for because of these things the punishment of God comes on those who do not put themselves under him.
Have no part with such men;
For you at one time were dark, but now are light in the Lord: let your behaviour be that of children of light
(Because the fruit of the light is in all righteousness and in everything which is good and true),
Testing by experience what is well-pleasing to the Lord;
And have no company with the works of the dark, which give no fruit, but make their true quality clear;
For the things which are done by them in secret it is shame even to put into words.
But all things, when their true quality is seen, are made clear by the light: because everything which is made clear is light.
For this reason he says, Be awake, you who are sleeping, and come up from among the dead, and Christ will be your light.
Take care then how you are living, not as unwise, but as wise;
Making good use of the time, because the days are evil.
For this reason, then, do not be foolish, but be conscious of the Lord's pleasure.
And do not take overmuch wine by which one may be overcome, but be full of the Spirit;
Joining with one another in holy songs of praise and of the Spirit, using your voice in songs and making melody in your heart to the Lord;
Giving praise at all times for all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to God, even the Father;
Letting yourselves be ruled by one another in the fear of Christ.
Wives, be under the authority of your husbands, as of the Lord.
For the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the church, being himself the saviour of the body.
And as the church is under Christ's authority, so let wives be under the rule of their husbands in all things.
Husbands, have love for your wives, even as Christ had love for the church, and gave himself for it;
So that he might make it holy, having made it clean with the washing of water by the word,
And might take it for himself, a church full of glory, not having one mark or fold or any such thing; but that it might be holy and complete.
Even so it is right for husbands to have love for their wives as for their bodies. He who has love for his wife has love for himself:
For no man ever had hate for his flesh; but he gives it food and takes care of it, even as Christ does for the church;
Because we are parts of his body.
For this cause will a man go away from his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.
This is a great secret: but my words are about Christ and the church.
But do you, everyone, have love for his wife, even as for himself; and let the wife see that she has respect for her husband.
Children, do what is ordered by your fathers and mothers in the Lord: for this is right.
Give honour to your father and mother (which is the first rule having a reward),
So that all may be well for you, and your life may be long on the earth.
And, you fathers, do not make your children angry: but give them training in the teaching and fear of the Lord.
Servants, do what is ordered by those who are your natural masters, having respect and fear for them, with all your heart, as to Christ;
Not only under your master's eye, as pleasers of men; but as servants of Christ, doing the pleasure of God from the heart;
Doing your work readily, as to the Lord, and not to men:
In the knowledge that for every good thing anyone does, he will have his reward from the Lord, If he is a servant or if he is free.
And, you masters, do the same things to them, not making use of violent words: in the knowledge that their Master and yours is in heaven, and he has no respect for a man's position.
Lastly, be strong in the Lord, and in the strength of his power.
Take up God's instruments of war, so that you may be able to keep your position against all the deceits of the Evil One.
For our fight is not against flesh and blood, but against authorities and powers, against the world-rulers of this dark night, against the spirits of evil in the heavens.
For this reason take up all the arms of God, so that you may be able to be strong in the evil day, and, having done all, to keep your place.
Take your place, then, having your body clothed with the true word, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness;
Be ready with the good news of peace as shoes on your feet;
And most of all, using faith as a cover to keep off all the flaming arrows of the Evil One.
And take salvation for your head-dress and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:
With prayers and deep desires, making requests at all times in the Spirit, and keeping watch, with strong purpose, in prayer for all the saints,
And for me, that words may be given to me in the opening of my mouth, to make clear without fear the secret of the good news,
For which I am a representative in chains, and that I may say without fear the things which it is right for me to say.
But so that you may have knowledge of my business, and how I am, Tychicus, the well-loved brother and tested servant in the Lord, will give you news of all things:
Whom I have sent to you for this very purpose, so that you may have knowledge of our position, and that he may give comfort to your hearts.
Peace be to the brothers, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Grace be with all those who have true love for our Lord Jesus Christ.
Paul and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons of the church:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I give praise to my God at every memory of you,
And in all my prayers for you all, making my request with joy,
Because of your help in giving the good news from the first day till now;
For I am certain of this very thing, that he by whom the good work was started in you will make it complete till the day of Jesus Christ:
So it is right for me to take thought for you all in this way, because I have you in my heart; for in my chains, and in my arguments before the judges in support of the good news, making clear that it is true, you all have your part with me in grace.
For God is my witness, how my love goes out to you all in the loving mercies of Christ Jesus.
And my prayer is that you may be increased more and more in knowledge and experience;
So that you may give your approval to the best things; that you may be true and without wrongdoing till the day of Christ;
Being full of the fruits of righteousness, which are through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.
Now it is my purpose to make clear to you, brothers, that the cause of the good news has been helped by my experiences;
So that it became clear through all the Praetorium, and to all the rest, that I was a prisoner on account of Christ;
And most of the brothers in the Lord, taking heart because of my chains, are all the stronger to give the word of God without fear.
Though some are preaching Christ out of envy and competition, others do it out of a good heart:
These do it from love, conscious that I am responsible for the cause of the good news:
But those are preaching Christ in a spirit of competition, not from their hearts, but with the purpose of giving me pain in my prison.
What then? only that in every way, falsely or truly, the preaching of Christ goes on; and in this I am glad, and will be glad.
For I am conscious that this will be for my salvation, through your prayer and the giving out of the stored wealth of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
In the measure of my strong hope and belief that in nothing will I be put to shame, but that without fear, as at all times, so now will Christ have glory in my body, by life or by death.
For to me life is Christ and death is profit.
But if I go on living in the flesh — if this is the fruit of my work — then I do not see what decision to make.
I am in a hard position between the two, having a desire to go away and be with Christ, which is very much better:
Still, to go on in the flesh is more necessary because of you.
And being certain of this, I am conscious that I will go on, yes, and go on with you all, for your growth and joy in the faith;
So that your pride in me may be increased in Christ Jesus through my being present with you again.
Only let your behaviour do credit to the good news of Christ, so that if I come and see you or if I am away from you, I may have news of you that you are strong in one spirit, working together with one soul for the faith of the good news;
Having no fear of those who are against you; which is a clear sign of their destruction, but of your salvation, and that from God;
Because to you it has been given in the cause of Christ not only to have faith in him, but to undergo pain on his account:
Fighting the same fight which you saw in me, and now have word of in me.
If then there is any comfort in Christ, any help given by love, any uniting of hearts in the Spirit, any loving mercies and pity,
Make my joy complete by being of the same mind, having the same love, being in harmony and of one mind;
Doing nothing through envy or through pride, but with low thoughts of self let everyone take others to be better than himself;
Not looking everyone to his private good, but keeping in mind the things of others.
Let this mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus,
To whom, though himself in the form of God, it did not seem that to take for oneself was to be like God;
But he made himself as nothing, taking the form of a servant, being made like men;
And being seen in form as a man, he took the lowest place, and let himself be put to death, even the death of the cross.
For this reason God has put him in the highest place and has given to him the name which is greater than every name;
So that at the name of Jesus every knee may be bent, of those in heaven and those on earth and those in the underworld,
And that every tongue may give witness that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
So then, my loved ones, as you have at all times done what I say, not only when I am present, but now much more when I am not with you, give yourselves to working out your salvation with fear in your hearts;
For it is God who is the cause of your desires and of your acts, for his good pleasure.
Do all things without protests and arguments;
So that you may be holy and gentle, children of God without sin in a twisted and foolish generation, among whom you are seen as lights in the world,
Offering the word of life; so that I may have glory in you in the day of Christ, because my running was not for nothing and my work was not without effect.
And even if I am offered like a drink offering, giving myself for the cause and work of your faith, I am glad and have joy with you all:
And in the same way do you be glad and have a part in my joy.
But I am hoping in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you before long, so that I may be comforted when I have news of you.
For I have no man of like mind who will truly have care for you.
For they all go after what is theirs, not after the things of Christ.
But his quality is clear to you; how, as a child is to its father, so he was a help to me in the work of the good news.
Him then I am hoping to send as quickly as possible, when I am able to see how things will go for me:
But I have faith in the Lord that I myself will come before long.
But it seemed to me necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, who has taken part with me in the work and in the fight, and your servant, sent by you for help in my need;
Because his heart was with you all, and he was greatly troubled because you had news that he was ill:
For in fact he was ill almost to death: but God had mercy on him; and not only on him but on me, so that I might not have grief on grief.
I have sent him, then, the more gladly, so that when you see him again, you may be happy and I may have the less sorrow.
So take him to your hearts in the Lord with all joy, and give honour to such as he is:
Because for the work of Christ he was near to death, putting his life in danger to make your care for me complete.
For the rest, my brothers, be glad in the Lord. Writing the same things to you is no trouble to me, and for you it is safe.
Be on the watch against dogs, against the workers of evil, against those of the circumcision:
For we are the circumcision, who give worship to God and have glory in Jesus Christ, and have no faith in the flesh:
Even though I myself might have faith in the flesh: if any other man has reason to have faith in the flesh, I have more:
Being given circumcision on the eighth day, of the nation of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; in relation to the law, a Pharisee:
In bitter hate I was cruel to the church; I kept all the righteousness of the law to the last detail.
But those things which were profit to me, I gave up for Christ.
Yes truly, and I am ready to give up all things for the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, which is more than all: for whom I have undergone the loss of all things, and to me they are less than nothing, so that I may have Christ as my reward,
And be seen in him, not having my righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith:
That I may have knowledge of him, and of the power of his coming back from the dead, and a part with him in his pains, becoming like him in his death;
If in any way I may have the reward of life from the dead.
Not as if I had even now got the reward or been made complete: but I go on in the hope that I may come to the knowledge of that for which I was made the servant of Christ Jesus.
Brothers, it is clear to me that I have not come to that knowledge; but one thing I do, letting go those things which are past, and stretching out to the things which are before,
I go forward to the mark, even the reward of the high purpose of God in Christ Jesus.
Then let us all, who have come to full growth, be of this mind: and if in anything you are of a different mind, even this will God make clear to you:
Only, as far as we have got, let us be guided by the same rule.
Brothers, take me as your example, and take note of those who are walking after the example we have given.
For there are those, of whom I have given you word before, and do so now with sorrow, who are haters of the cross of Christ;
Whose end is destruction, whose god is the stomach, and whose glory is in their shame, whose minds are fixed on the things of the earth.
For our country is in heaven; from where the Saviour for whom we are waiting will come, even the Lord Jesus Christ:
By whom this poor body of ours will be changed into the image of the body of his glory, in the measure of the working by which he is able to put all things under himself.
So my brothers, well loved and very dear to me, my joy and crown, be strong in the Lord, my loved ones.
I make request to Euodias and Syntyche to be of the same mind in the Lord.
And I make request to you, true helper in my work, to see to the needs of those women who took part with me in the good news, with Clement and the rest of my brother-workers whose names are in the book of life.
Be glad in the Lord at all times: again I say, Be glad.
Let your gentle behaviour be clear to all men. The Lord is near.
Have no cares; but in everything with prayer and praise put your requests before God.
And the peace of God, which is deeper than all knowledge, will keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
For the rest, my brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things have honour, whatever things are upright, whatever things are holy, whatever things are beautiful, whatever things are of value, if there is any virtue and if there is any praise, give thought to these things.
The things which came to you by my teaching and preaching, and which you saw in me, these things do, and the God of peace will be with you.
But I am very glad in the Lord that your care for me has come to life again; though you did in fact take thought for me, but you were not able to give effect to it.
But I will not say anything about my needs, for I am able, wherever I am, to be dependent on myself.
It is the same to me if I am looked down on or honoured; everywhere and in all things I have the secret of how to be full and how to go without food; how to have wealth and how to be in need.
I am able to do all things through him who gives me strength.
But you did well to have care for me in my need.
And you have knowledge, Philippians, that when the good news first came to you, when I went away from Macedonia, no church took part with me in the business of giving to the saints, but you only;
Because even in Thessalonica you sent once and again to me in my need.
Not that I am looking for an offering, but for fruit which may be put to your credit.
I have all things and more than enough: I am made full, having had from Epaphroditus the things which came from you, a perfume of a sweet smell, an offering well pleasing to God.
And my God will give you all you have need of from the wealth of his glory in Christ Jesus.
Now to God our Father be glory for ever and ever. So be it.
Give words of love to every saint in Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me send you their love.
All the saints send their love to you, specially those who are of Caesar's house.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the purpose of God, and Timothy our brother,
To the saints and true brothers in Christ at Colossae: Grace to you and peace from God our Father.
We give praise to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, making prayer for you at all times,
After hearing of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which you have for all the saints,
Through the hope which is in store for you in heaven; knowledge of which was given to you before in the true word of the good news,
Which has come to you; and which in all the world is giving fruit and increase, as it has done in you from the day when it came to your ears and you had true knowledge of the grace of God;
As it was given to you by Epaphras, our well-loved helper, who is a true servant of Christ for us,
And who, himself, made clear to us your love in the Spirit.
For this reason, we, from the day when we had word of it, keep on in prayer for you, that you may be full of the knowledge of his purpose, with all wisdom and experience of the Spirit,
Living uprightly in the approval of the Lord, giving fruit in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God;
Full of strength in the measure of the great power of his glory, so that you may undergo all troubles with joy;
Giving praise to the Father who has given us a part in the heritage of the saints in light;
Who has made us free from the power of evil and given us a place in the kingdom of the Son of his love;
In whom we have our salvation, the forgiveness of sins:
Who is the image of the unseen God coming into existence before all living things;
For by him all things were made, in heaven and on earth, things seen and things unseen, authorities, lords, rulers, and powers; all things were made by him and for him;
He is before all things, and in him all things have being.
And he is the head of the body, the church: the starting point of all things, the first to come again from the dead; so that in all things he might have the chief place.
For God in full measure was pleased to be in him;
Through him uniting all things with himself, having made peace through the blood of his cross; through him, I say, uniting all things which are on earth or in heaven.
And you, who in the past were cut off and at war with God in your minds through evil works, he has now made one
In the body of his flesh through death, so that you might be holy and without sin and free from all evil before him:
If you keep yourselves safely based in the faith, not moved from the hope of the good news which came to you, and which was given to every living being under heaven; of which I, Paul, was made a servant.
Now I have joy in my pain because of you, and in my flesh I undergo whatever is still needed to make the sorrows of Christ complete, for the salvation of his body, the church;
Of which I became a servant by the purpose of God which was given to me for you, to give effect to the word of God,
The secret which has been kept from all times and generations, but has now been made clear to his saints,
To whom God was pleased to give knowledge of the wealth of the glory of this secret among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory:
Whom we are preaching; guiding and teaching every man in all wisdom, so that every man may be complete in Christ;
And for this purpose I am working, using all my strength by the help of his power which is working in me strongly.
For it is my desire to give you news of the great fight I am making for you and for those at Laodicea, and for all who have not seen my face in the flesh;
So that their hearts may be comforted, and that being joined together in love, they may come to the full wealth of the certain knowledge of the secret of God, even Christ,
In whom are all the secret stores of wisdom and knowledge.
I say this so that you may not be turned away by any deceit of words.
For though I am not present in the flesh, still I am with you in the spirit, seeing with joy your order, and your unchanging faith in Christ.
As, then, you took Christ Jesus the Lord, so go on in him,
Rooted and based together in him, strong in the faith which the teaching gave you, giving praise to God at all times.
Take care that no one takes you away by force, through man's wisdom and deceit, going after the beliefs of men and the theories of the world, and not after Christ:
For in him all the wealth of God's being has a living form,
And you are complete in him, who is the head of all rule and authority:
In whom you had a circumcision not made with hands, in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of Christ;
Having been put to death with him in baptism, by which you came to life again with him, through faith in the working of God, who made him come back from the dead.
And you, being dead through your sins and the evil condition of your flesh, to you, I say, he gave life together with him, and forgiveness of all our sins;
Having put an end to the handwriting of the law which was against us, taking it out of the way by nailing it to his cross;
Having made himself free from the rule of authorities and powers, he put them openly to shame, glorying over them in it.
For this reason let no man be your judge in any question of food or drink or feast days or new moons or Sabbaths:
For these are an image of the things which are to come; but the body is Christ's.
Let no man take your reward from you by consciously making little of himself and giving worship to angels; having his thoughts fixed on the things which he has seen, being foolishly lifted up in his natural mind,
And not joined to the Head, from whom all the body, being given strength and kept together through its joins and bands, has its growth with the increase of God.
If you were made free, by your death with Christ, from the rules of the world, why do you put yourselves under the authority of orders
Which say there may be no touching, tasting, or taking in your hands,
(Rules which are all to come to an end with their use) after the orders and teaching of men?
These things seem to have a sort of wisdom in self-ordered worship and making little of oneself, and being cruel to the body, not honouring it by giving it its natural use.
If then you have a new life with Christ, give your attention to the things of heaven, where Christ is seated at the right hand of God.
Keep your mind on the higher things, not on the things of earth.
For your life on earth is done, and you have a secret life with Christ in God.
At the coming of Christ who is our life, you will be seen with him in glory.
Then put to death your bodies which are of the earth; wrong use of the flesh, unclean things, passion, evil desires and envy, which is the worship of strange gods;
Because of which the wrath of God comes on those who go against his orders;
Among whom you were living in the past, when you did such things.
But now it is right for you to put away all these things; wrath, passion, bad feeling, curses, unclean talk;
Do not make false statements to one another; because you have put away the old man with all his doings,
And have put on the new man, which has become new in knowledge after the image of his maker;
Where there is no Greek or Jew, no one with circumcision or without circumcision, no division between nations, no servant or free man: but Christ is all and in all.
As saints of God, then, holy and dearly loved, let your behaviour be marked by pity and mercy, kind feeling, a low opinion of yourselves, gentle ways, and a power of undergoing all things;
Being gentle to one another and having forgiveness for one another, if anyone has done wrong to his brother, even as the Lord had forgiveness for you:
And more than all, have love; the only way in which you may be completely joined together.
And let the peace of Christ be ruling in your hearts, as it was the purpose of God for you to be one body; and give praise to God at all times.
Let the word of Christ be in you in all wealth of wisdom; teaching and helping one another with songs of praise and holy words, making melody to God with grace in your hearts.
And whatever you do, in word or in act, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving praise to God the Father through him.
Wives, be under the authority of your husbands, as is right in the Lord.
Husbands, have love for your wives, and be not bitter against them.
Children, do the orders of your fathers and mothers in all things, for this is pleasing to the Lord.
Fathers, do not be hard on your children, so that their spirit may not be broken.
Servants, in all things do the orders of your natural masters; not only when their eyes are on you, as pleasers of men, but with all your heart, fearing the Lord:
Whatever you do, do it readily, as to the Lord and not to men;
Being certain that the Lord will give you the reward of the heritage: for you are the servants of the Lord Christ.
For the wrongdoer will have punishment for the wrong he has done, without respect for any man's position.
Masters, give your servants what is right and equal, conscious that you have a Master in heaven.
Give yourselves to prayer at all times, keeping watch with praise;
And making prayer for us, that God may give us an open door for the preaching of the word, the secret of Christ, for which I am now in chains;
So that I may make it clear, as it is right for me to do.
Be wise in your behaviour to those who are outside, making good use of the time.
Let your talk be with grace, mixed with salt, so that you may be able to give an answer to everyone.
Tychicus will give you news of all my business: he is a dear brother and true servant and helper in the word;
And I have sent him to you for this very purpose, so that you may have news of how we are, and so that he may give your hearts comfort;
And with him I have sent Onesimus, the true and well-loved brother, who is one of you. They will give you word of everything which is taking place here.
Aristarchus, my brother-prisoner, sends his love to you, and Mark, a relation of Barnabas (about whom you have been given orders: if he comes to you, be kind to him),
And Jesus, whose other name is Justus; these are of the circumcision: they are my only brother-workers for the kingdom of God, who have been a comfort to me.
Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ Jesus, sends you his love, ever taking thought for you in his prayers, that you may be complete and fully certain of all the purpose of God.
For I give witness of him that he has undergone much trouble for you and for those in Laodicea and in Hierapolis.
Luke, our well-loved medical friend, and Demas, send you their love.
Give my love to the brothers in Laodicea and to Nymphas and the church in their house.
And when this letter has been made public among you, let the same be done in the church of Laodicea; and see that you have the letter from Laodicea.
Say to Archippus, See that you do the work which the Lord has given you to do.
I, Paul, give you this word of love in my handwriting. Keep in memory that I am a prisoner. Grace be with you.
Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace.
We give praise to God at all times for you, keeping you in memory in our prayers;
Having ever in mind your work of faith and acts of love and the strength of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and Father;
Being conscious, my brothers, dear to God, that you have been marked out by God's purpose;
Because our good news came to you, not in word only, but in power, and in the Holy Spirit, so that you were completely certain of it; even as you saw what our behaviour to you was like from our love to you.
And you took us and the Lord as your example, after the word had come to you in much trouble, with joy in the Holy Spirit;
So that you became an example to all those who have faith in Christ in Macedonia and Achaia.
For not only was the word of the Lord sounding out from you in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place your faith in God is made clear; so that we have no need to say anything.
For they themselves give the news of how we came among you; and how you were turned from images to God, to the worship of a true and living God,
Waiting for his Son from heaven, who came back from the dead, even Jesus, our Saviour from the wrath to come.
For you yourselves, brothers, are conscious that our coming among you was not without effect:
But after we had first undergone much pain and been cruelly attacked as you saw, at Philippi, by the help of God we gave you the good news without fear, though everything was against us.
For our witness does not come from error or from an unclean heart or from deceit:
But even as the good news was given to us by the approval of God, so we give it out; not as pleasing men, but God by whom our hearts are tested.
For it is common knowledge among you that we never made use of smooth-sounding false words, and God is witness that at no time were we secretly desiring profit for ourselves,
Or looking for glory from men, from you or from others, when we might have made ourselves a care to you as Apostles of Christ.
But we were gentle among you, like a woman caring for her little ones:
Even so, being full of loving desire for you, we took delight in giving you not only God's good news, but even our lives, because you were dear to us.
For you have the memory, my brothers, of our trouble and care; how, working night and day, so that we might not be a trouble to any of you, we gave you the good news of God.
You are witnesses, with God, how holy and upright and free from all evil was our way of life among you who have faith;
Even as you saw how, like a father with his children, we were teaching and comforting you all, and giving witness,
So that your lives might be pleasing to God, who has given you a part in his kingdom and his glory.
And for this cause we still give praise to God, that, when the word came to your ears through us, you took it, not as the word of man, but, as it truly is, the word of God, which has living power in you who have faith.
For you, my brothers, took as your examples the churches of God which are in Judaea in Christ Jesus; because you underwent the same things from your countrymen as they did from the Jews;
Who put to death the Lord Jesus and the prophets, violently driving us out; who are unpleasing to God and against all men;
Who, to make the measure of their sins complete, kept us from giving the word of salvation to the Gentiles: but the wrath of God is about to come on them in the fullest degree.
But we, my brothers, being away from you for a short time, in body but not in heart, had all the more desire to see your face;
For which reason we made attempts to come to you, even I, Paul, once and again; but Satan kept us from coming.
For what is our hope or joy or crown of glory? Are not even you, before our Lord Jesus, at his coming?
For you are our glory and our joy.
At last our desire to have news of you was so strong that, while we ourselves were waiting at Athens,
We sent Timothy, our brother and God's servant in the good news of Christ, to give you strength and comfort in your faith;
So that no man might be moved by these troubles; because you see that these things are part of God's purpose for us.
And when we were with you, we said to you that trouble was before us; and so it came about, as you see.
For this reason, when I was no longer able to keep quiet, I sent to get news of your faith, fearing that you might be tested by the Evil One and that our work might come to nothing.
But now that Timothy has come to us from you, and has given us good news of your faith and love, and that you have happy memories of us, desiring greatly to see us, even as we do to see you;
For this cause, brothers, in all our trouble and grief we were comforted about you because of your faith;
For it is life to us if you keep your faith in the Lord unchanged.
For how great is the praise which we give to God for you, and how great the joy with which we are glad because of you before our God;
Night and day requesting God again and again that we may see your face and make your faith complete.
Now may our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus make a way for us to come to you;
And the Lord give you increase of love in fullest measure to one another and to all men, even as our love to you;
So that your hearts may be strong and free from all sin before our God and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints.
And last of all, the prayer which we make to you from our heart and in the name of the Lord Jesus, is this: that as we made clear to you what sort of behaviour is pleasing to God, as in fact you are doing now, so you will go on in these ways, but more and more.
Because you have in mind the orders we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
For the purpose of God for you is this: that you may be holy, and may keep yourselves from the desires of the flesh;
So that every one of you may keep his body holy and in honour;
Not in the passion of evil desires, like the Gentiles, who have no knowledge of God;
And that no man may make attempts to get the better of his brother in business: for the Lord is the judge in all these things, as we said to you before and gave witness.
Because it is God's purpose that our way of life may be not unclean but holy.
Whoever, then, goes against this word, goes against not man but God, who gives his Holy Spirit to you.
But about loving the brothers, there is no need for me to say anything to you in this letter: for you have the teaching of God that love for one another is right and necessary;
And, truly, you are lovers of all the brothers in Macedonia; but it is our desire that your love may be increased still more;
And that you may take pride in being quiet and doing your business, working with your hands as we gave you orders;
That you may be respected by those who are outside, and may have need of nothing.
But it is our desire, brothers, that you may be certain about those who are sleeping; so that you may have no need for sorrow, as others have who are without hope.
For if we have faith that Jesus underwent death and came back again, even so those who are sleeping will come again with him by God's power.
For this we say to you by the word of the Lord, that we who are still living at the coming of the Lord, will not go before those who are sleeping.
Because the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a word of authority, with the voice of the chief angel, with the sound of a horn: and the dead in Christ will come to life first;
Then we who are still living will be taken up together with them into the clouds to see the Lord in the air: and so will we be for ever with the Lord.
So then, give comfort to one another with these words.
But about the times and their order, my brothers, there is no need for me to say anything to you.
For you yourselves have the knowledge that the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night.
When they say, There is peace and no danger, then sudden destruction will come on them, as birth-pains on a woman with child; and they will not be able to get away from it.
But you, my brothers, are not in the dark, for that day to overtake you like a thief:
For you are all sons of light and of the day: we are not of the night or of the dark.
So then, let us not take our rest as the others do, but let us be self-controlled and awake.
For those who are sleeping do so in the night; and those who are the worse for drink are so in the night;
But let us, who are of the day, be serious, putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and on our heads, the hope of salvation.
For God's purpose for us is not wrath, but salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,
Who was put to death for us, so that, awake or sleeping, we may have a part in his life.
So then, go on comforting and building up one another, as you have been doing.
But we make this request to you, my brothers: give attention to those who are working among you, who are over you in the Lord to keep order among you;
And have a high opinion of them in love because of their work. Be at peace among yourselves.
And our desire is that you will keep control over those whose lives are not well ordered, giving comfort to the feeble-hearted, supporting those with little strength, and putting up with much from all.
Let no one give evil for evil; but ever go after what is good, for one another and for all.
Have joy at all times.
Keep on with your prayers.
In everything give praise: for this is the purpose of God in Christ Jesus for you.
Do not put out the light of the Spirit;
Do not make little of the words of the prophets;
Let all things be tested; keep to what is good;
Keep from every form of evil.
And may the God of peace himself make you holy in every way; and may your spirit and soul and body be free from all sin at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
God, by whom you have been marked out in his purpose, is unchanging and will make it complete.
Brothers, keep us in mind in your prayers.
Give all the brothers a holy kiss.
I give orders in the name of the Lord that all the brothers are to be present at the reading of this letter.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
Grace to you and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
It is right for us to give praise to God at all times for you, brothers, because of the great increase of your faith, and the wealth of your love for one another;
So that we ourselves take pride in you in the churches of God for your untroubled mind and your faith in all the troubles and sorrows which you are going through;
Which is a clear sign of the decision which God in his righteousness has made; to give you a part in his kingdom, for which you have undergone this pain;
For it is an act of righteousness on God's part to give trouble as their reward to those who are troubling you,
And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus comes from heaven with the angels of his power in flames of fire,
To give punishment to those who have no knowledge of God, and to those who do not give ear to the good news of our Lord Jesus:
Whose reward will be eternal destruction from the face of the Lord and from the glory of his strength,
At his coming, when he will have glory in his saints, and will be a cause of wonder in all those who had faith (because our witness among you had effect) in that day.
For this reason, you are ever in our prayers, that you may seem to our God such as may have a part in his purpose and that by his power he will make all his good purpose, and the work of faith, complete;
So that glory may be given to the name of our Lord Jesus through you, and you may have glory in him, by the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Now as to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, and our meeting with him, it is our desire, my brothers,
That you may not be moved in mind or troubled by a spirit, or by a word, or by a letter as from us, with the suggestion that the day of the Lord is even now come;
Give no belief to false words: because there will first be a falling away from the faith, and the revelation of the man of sin, the son of destruction,
Who puts himself against all authority, lifting himself up over all which is named God or is given worship; so that he takes his seat in the Temple of God, putting himself forward as God.
Have you no memory of what I said when I was with you, giving you word of these things?
And now it is clear to you what is keeping back his revelation till the time comes for him to be seen.
For the secret of evil is even now at work: but there is one who is keeping back the evil till he is taken out of the way.
And then will come the revelation of that evil one, whom the Lord Jesus will put to death with the breath of his mouth, and give to destruction by the revelation of his coming;
Even the one whose coming is marked by the working of Satan, with all power and signs and false wonders,
And with every deceit of wrongdoing among those whose fate is destruction; because they were quite without that love of the true faith by which they might have salvation.
And for this cause, God will give them up to the power of deceit and they will put their faith in what is false:
So that they all may be judged, who had no faith in what is true, but took pleasure in evil.
But it is right for us to give praise to God at all times for you, brothers, loved by the Lord, because it was the purpose of God from the first that you might have salvation, being made holy by the Spirit and by faith in what is true:
And in this purpose he gave you a part through the good news of which we were the preachers, even that you might have part in the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So then, brothers, be strong in purpose, and keep the teaching which has been given to you by word or by letter from us.
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God our Father who had love for us and has given us eternal comfort and good hope through grace,
Give you comfort and strength in every good work and word.
For the rest, my brothers, let there be prayer for us that the word of the Lord may go forward with increasing glory, even as it does with you;
And that we may be made free from foolish and evil men; for not all have faith.
But the Lord is true, who will give you strength and keep you safe from evil.
And we have faith in the Lord about you, that you are doing and will do the things about which we give you orders.
And may your hearts be guided by the Lord into the love of God and quiet waiting for Christ.
Now we give you orders, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to keep away from all those whose behaviour is not well ordered and in harmony with the teaching which they had from us.
For you yourselves are used to taking us as your example, because our life among you was ruled by order,
And we did not take food from any man for nothing, but were working hard night and day not to be a trouble to any of you:
Not because we have not the right, but to make ourselves an example to you, so that you might do the same.
For even when we were with you we gave you orders, saying, If any man does no work, let him not have food.
For it has come to our ears that there are some among you whose behaviour is uncontrolled, who do no work at all, but are over-interested in the business of others.
Now to such we give orders and make request in the Lord Jesus, that, working quietly, they get their living.
And you, my brothers, do not get tired of well-doing.
And if any man does not give attention to what we have said in this letter, take note of that man, and keep away from him, so that he may be shamed.
Have no feeling of hate for him, but take him in hand seriously as a brother.
Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times and in every way. May the Lord be with you all.
These words of love to you at the end are in my writing, Paul's writing, and this is the mark of every letter from me.
May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the order of God our Saviour and Christ Jesus our hope;
To Timothy, my true child in the faith: Grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
It was my desire, when I went on into Macedonia, that you might make a stop at Ephesus, to give orders to certain men not to put forward a different teaching,
Or to give attention to stories and long lists of generations, from which come questionings and doubts, in place of God's ordered way of life which is in faith;
But the effect of the order is love coming from a clean heart, and a knowledge of what is right, and true faith:
From which some have been turned away, giving themselves to foolish talking;
Desiring to be teachers of the law, though they have no knowledge of what they say or of the statements which they make so certainly.
We are conscious that the law is good, if a man makes a right use of it,
With the knowledge that the law is made, not for the upright man, but for those who have no respect for law and order, for evil men and sinners, for the unholy and those who have no religion, for those who put their fathers or mothers to death, for takers of life,
For those who go after loose women, for those with unnatural desires, for those who take men prisoners, who make false statements and false oaths, and those who do any other things against the right teaching,
Which may be seen in the good news of the glory of the great God, which was given into my care.
I give praise to him who gave me power, Christ Jesus our Lord, because he took me to be true, making me his servant,
Though I had said violent words against God, and done cruel acts, causing great trouble: but I was given mercy, because I did it without knowledge, not having faith;
And the grace of our Lord was very great, with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
It is a true saying, in which all may put their faith, that Christ Jesus came into the world to give salvation to sinners, of whom I am the chief:
But for this reason I was given mercy, so that in me, the chief of sinners, Jesus Christ might make clear all his mercy, as an example to those who in the future would have faith in him to eternal life.
Now to the King eternal, ever-living, unseen, the only God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. So be it.
This order I give to you, Timothy my son, in harmony with the words of the prophets about you, so that by them you may be strong, fighting the good fight,
Keeping faith, and being conscious of well-doing; for some, by not doing these things, have gone wrong in relation to the faith:
Such are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have given up to Satan, so that they may say no more evil words against God.
My desire is, first of all, that you will make requests and prayers and give praise for all men;
For kings and all those in authority; so that we may have a calm and quiet life in all fear of God and serious behaviour.
This is good and pleasing in the eyes of God our Saviour;
Whose desire is that all men may have salvation and come to the knowledge of what is true.
For there is one God and one peacemaker between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
Who gave himself as an offering for all; witness of which was to be given at the right time;
And of this I became a preacher and an Apostle (what I say is true, not false,) and a teacher of the Gentiles in the true faith.
It is my desire, then, that in every place men may give themselves to prayer, lifting up holy hands, without wrath or argument.
And that women may be dressed in simple clothing, with a quiet and serious air; not with twisted hair and gold or jewels or robes of great price;
But clothed with good works, as is right for women who are living in the fear of God.
Let a woman quietly take the place of a learner and be under authority.
In my opinion it is right for a woman not to be a teacher, or to have rule over a man, but to be quiet.
For Adam was first formed, then Eve;
And Adam was not taken by deceit, but the woman, being tricked, became a wrongdoer.
But if they go on in faith and love and holy self-control, she will be kept safe at the time of childbirth.
This is a true saying, A man desiring the position of a Bishop has a desire for a good work.
The Bishop, then, is to be a man of good name, the husband of one wife, self-controlled, serious-minded, having respect for order, opening his house freely to guests, a ready teacher;
Not quickly moved to wrath or blows, but gentle; no fighter, no lover of money;
Ruling his house well, having his children under control with all serious behaviour;
(For if a man has not the art of ruling his house, how will he take care of the church of God?)
Not one newly taken into the church, for fear that, through his high opinion of himself, he may come into the same sin as the Evil One.
And he is to have a good name among those outside the church, so that nothing may be said against him and he may not be taken by the designs of the Evil One.
Deacons, in the same way, are to be serious in their behaviour, not false in word, not given to taking much wine or greatly desiring the wealth of this world;
Keeping the secret of the faith in a heart free from sin.
And let these first be put to the test; then let them become Deacons if there is nothing against them.
Women are to be serious in behaviour, saying no evil of others, controlling themselves, true in all things.
Let Deacons be husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their houses well.
For those who have done good work as Deacons get for themselves a good position and become free from fear in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
I am writing these things to you, though I am hoping to come to you before long;
But if I am long in coming, this will make clear to you what behaviour is right for men in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and base of what is true.
And without argument, great is the secret of religion: He who was seen in the flesh, who was given God's approval in the spirit, was seen by the angels, of whom the good news was given among the nations, in whom the world had faith, who was taken up in glory.
But the Spirit says clearly that in later times some will be turned away from the faith, giving their minds to spirits of deceit, and the teachings of evil spirits,
Through the false ways of men whose words are untrue, whose hearts are burned as with a heated iron;
Who keep men from being married and from taking food which God made to be taken with praise by those who have faith and true knowledge.
Because everything which God has made is good, and nothing is evil, if it is taken with praise:
For it is made holy by the word of God and by prayer.
If you keep these things before the minds of the brothers, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, trained in the words of the faith and of the right teaching which has been your guide:
But have nothing to do with unclean and foolish stories. Give yourself training in religion:
For the training of the body is of profit for a little, but religion is of profit in every way, giving hope for the life which now is, and for that which is to come.
This is a true saying, in which all may put their faith.
And this is the purpose of all our work and our fighting, because our hope is in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, and specially of those who have faith.
Let these be your orders and your teaching.
Let no one make little of you because you are young, but be an example to the church in word, in behaviour, in love, in faith, in holy living.
Till I come, give attention to the reading of the holy Writings, to comforting the saints, and to teaching.
Make use of that grace in you, which was given to you by the word of the prophets, when the rulers of the church put their hands on you.
Have a care for these things; give yourself to them with all your heart, so that all may see how you go forward.
Give attention to yourself and your teaching. Go on in these things; for in doing so you will get salvation for yourself and for those who give hearing to you.
Do not say sharp words to one who has authority in the church, but let your talk be as to a father, and to the younger men as to brothers:
To the older women as to mothers, to the younger as to sisters, with a clean heart.
Give honour to widows who are truly widows.
But if any widow has children or children's children, let these see that it is right to take care of their family and their fathers and mothers: for this is pleasing in the eyes of God.
Now she who is truly a widow and without family puts her hope in God, giving herself to prayer day and night.
But she who gives herself to pleasure is dead while she is living.
Give orders to this effect, so that no evil may be said of anyone.
If anyone has no care for his family and those in his house, he is false to the faith, and is worse than one who has no faith.
Let no woman be numbered among the widows who is under sixty years old, and only if she has been the wife of one man,
And if witness is given of her good works; if she has had the care of children, if she has been kind to travellers, washing the feet of the saints, helping those who are in trouble, giving herself to good works.
But to the younger widows say No: for when their love is turned away from Christ, they have a desire to be married;
And they are judged because they have been false to their first faith;
And they get into the way of doing no work, going about from house to house; and not only doing no work, but talking foolishly, being over-interested in the business of others, saying things which they have no right to say.
So it is my desire that the younger widows may be married and have children, controlling their families, and giving the Evil One no chance to say anything against them,
For even now some are turned away to Satan.
If any woman of the faith has relations who are widows, let her give them help, so that the care of them does not come on the church, and so it may give help to those who are truly widowed.
Let rulers whose rule is good be honoured twice over, specially those whose work is preaching and teaching.
For the Writings say, It is not right to keep the ox from taking the grain when he is crushing it. And, The worker has a right to his reward.
Do not take as true any statement made against one in authority, but only if two or three give witness to it.
Say sharp words to sinners when all are present, so that the rest may be in fear.
I give you orders before God and Christ Jesus and the angels of God's selection, to keep these orders without giving thought to one side more than another.
Do not put hands on any man without thought, and have no part in other men's sins: keep yourself clean.
Do not take only water as your drink, but take a little wine for the good of your stomach, and because you are frequently ill.
The sins of some men are clearly seen, going before them to be judged; but with others, their sins go after them.
In the same way, there are good works which are clearly seen; and those which are not so, may not be kept secret.
Let all who are servants under the yoke give all honour to their masters, so that no evil may be said against the name of God and his teaching.
And let those whose masters are of the faith have respect for them because they are brothers, working for them the more readily, because those who take part in the good work are of the faith and are dear. Give orders and teaching about these things.
If any man gives different teaching, not in agreement with the true words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the teaching which is in agreement with true religion,
He has an over-high opinion of himself; being without knowledge, having only an unhealthy love of questionings and wars of words, from which come envy, fighting, cruel words, evil thoughts,
Bitter talk of men who, being evil in mind and dead to what is true, take the faith to be a way of making profit.
But true faith, with peace of mind, is of great profit:
For we came into the world with nothing, and we are not able to take anything out;
But if we have food and a roof over us, let that be enough.
But those who have a desire for wealth are falling into danger, and are taken as in a net by a number of foolish and damaging desires, through which men are overtaken by death and destruction.
For the love of money is a root of all evil: and some whose hearts were fixed on it have been turned away from the faith, and been wounded with unnumbered sorrows.
But you, O man of God, keep yourself from these things, and go after righteousness, religion, faith, love, a quiet mind, gentle behaviour.
Be fighting the good fight of the faith; take for yourself the life eternal, for which you were marked out, and of which you gave witness in the eyes of all.
I give you orders before God, the giver of life, and Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate gave witness to the faith,
To keep the word untouched by evil, clear from all shame, till the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Which at the right time he will make clear, who is the eternal and only Ruler, King of kings, and Lord of lords;
Who only has life for ever, living in light to which no man may come near; whom no man has seen or is able to see: to whom be honour and power for ever. So be it.
Give orders to those who have money and goods in this life, not to be lifted up in their minds, or to put their hope in the uncertain chances of wealth, but in God who gives us in full measure all things for our use;
And to do good, having wealth in good works, being quick to give, taking part with one another;
Making ready for themselves a safe place for the time to come, so that the true life may be theirs.
O Timothy, take good care of that which is given to you, turning away from the wrong and foolish talk and arguments of that knowledge which is falsely so named;
Through which some, who gave their minds to it, have been turned away from the faith. Grace be with you.
Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the purpose of God, in the hope of the life which is in Christ Jesus,
To Timothy, my well-loved child: Grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
I give praise to God, whose servant I have been, with a heart free from sin, from the time of my fathers, because in my prayers at all times the thought of you is with me, night and day
Desiring to see you, keeping in my memory your weeping, so that I may be full of joy;
Having in mind your true faith, which first was in your mother's mother Lois, and in your mother Eunice, and, I am certain, is now in you.
For this reason I say to you, Let that grace of God which is in you, given to you by my hands, have living power.
For God did not give us a spirit of fear, but of power and of love and of self-control.
Have no feeling of shame, then, for the witness of our Lord or for me, his prisoner: but undergo all things for the good news in the measure of the power of God;
Who gave us salvation, marking us out for his purpose, not on account of our works, but in the measure of his purpose and his grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus before times eternal,
But has now been made clear by the revelation of our Saviour Christ Jesus, who put an end to death and made life unending come to light through the good news,
Of which I was made a preacher and an Apostle and a teacher;
And for which I undergo these things: but I have no feeling of shame. For I have knowledge of him in whom I have faith, and I am certain that he is able to keep that which I have given into his care till that day.
Keep the form of those true words which you had from me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
That good thing which was given to you keep safe, through the Holy Spirit which is in us.
You have had news that all those in Asia went away from me; among whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes:
May the Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus because he frequently gave me help, and had no feeling of shame because I was in chains;
But when he was in Rome, he went in search of me everywhere, and came to me
(May he have the Lord's mercy in that day); and of all he did for me at Ephesus you have full knowledge.
So then, my child, be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus.
And the things which I have said to you before a number of witnesses, give to those of the faith, so that they may be teachers of others.
Be ready to do without the comforts of life, as one of the army of Christ Jesus.
A fighting man, when he is with the army, keeps himself free from the business of this life so that he may be pleasing to him who has taken him into his army.
And if a man takes part in a competition he does not get the crown if he has not kept the rules.
It is right for the worker in the fields to be the first to take of the fruit.
Give thought to what I say; for the Lord will give you wisdom in all things.
Keep in mind Jesus Christ, of the seed of David, who came back from the dead, as my good news gives witness:
In which I put up with the hardest conditions, even prison chains, like one who has done a crime; but the word of God is not in chains.
But I undergo all things for the saints, so that they may have salvation in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.
This is a true saying: If we undergo death with him, then will we be living with him:
If we go on to the end, then we will be ruling with him: if we say we have no knowledge of him, then he will say he has no knowledge of us:
If we are without faith, still he keeps faith, for he will never be untrue to himself.
Put these things before them, giving them orders in the name of the Lord to keep themselves from fighting about words, which is of no profit, only causing error in their hearers.
Let it be your care to get the approval of God, as a workman who has no cause for shame, giving the true word in the right way.
But take no part in wrong and foolish talk, for those who do so will go farther into evil,
And their words will be like poisoned wounds in the flesh: such are Hymenaeus and Philetus;
Men whose ideas are all false, who say that the coming back from the dead has even now taken place, overturning the faith of some.
But God's strong base is unchanging, having this sign, The Lord has knowledge of those who are his: and, Let everyone by whom the name of the Lord is named be turned away from evil.
Now in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but others of wood and earth, and some which are honoured and some without honour.
If a man makes himself clean from these, he will be a vessel for honour, made holy, ready for the master's use, ready for every good work.
But keep yourself from those desires of the flesh which are strong when the body is young, and go after righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those whose prayers go up to the Lord from a clean heart.
And put away foolish and uncontrolled questionings, seeing that they are a cause of trouble.
For it is not right for the Lord's servant to make trouble, but he is to be gentle to all, ready in teaching, putting up with wrong,
Gently guiding those who go against the teaching; if by chance God may give them a change of heart and true knowledge,
And so they may get themselves free from the net of the Evil One, being made the prisoners of the Lord's servant, for the purpose of God.
But be certain of this, that in the last days times of trouble will come.
For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, uplifted in pride, given to bitter words, going against the authority of their fathers, never giving praise, having no religion,
Without natural love, bitter haters, saying evil of others, violent and uncontrolled, hating all good,
False to their friends, acting without thought, lifted up in mind, loving pleasure more than God;
Having a form of religion, but turning their backs on the power of it: go not with these.
For these are they who go secretly into houses, making prisoners of foolish women, weighted down with sin, turned from the way by their evil desires,
Ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge of what is true.
And as James and Jambres went against Moses, so do these go against what is true: men of evil minds, who, tested by faith, are seen to be false.
But they will go no farther: for their foolish behaviour will be clear to all men, as theirs was in the end.
But you took as your example my teaching, behaviour, purpose, and faith; my long waiting, my love, my quiet undergoing of trouble;
My punishments and pain; the things which came to me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; the cruel attacks made on me: and the Lord made me free from them all.
Yes, and all whose purpose is to be living in the knowledge of God in Christ Jesus, will be cruelly attacked.
Evil and false men will become worse and worse, using deceit and themselves overcome by deceit.
But see that you keep to the teaching you have been given and the things of which you are certain, conscious of who has been your teacher;
And that from the time when you were a child, you have had knowledge of the holy Writings, which are able to make you wise to salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus.
Every holy Writing which comes from God is of profit for teaching, for training, for guiding, for education in righteousness:
So that the man of God may be complete, trained and made ready for every good work.
I give you orders, before God and Christ Jesus, who will be the judge of the living and the dead, and by his revelation and his kingdom;
Be preaching the word at all times, in every place; make protests, say sharp words, give comfort, with long waiting and teaching;
For the time will come when they will not take the true teaching; but, moved by their desires, they will get for themselves a great number of teachers for the pleasure of hearing them;
And shutting their ears to what is true, will be turned away to belief in foolish stories.
But be self-controlled in all things, do without comfort, go on preaching the good news, completing the work which has been given you to do.
For I am even now being offered, and my end is near.
I have made a good fight, I have come to the end of my journey, I have kept the faith:
From now on, the crown of righteousness is made ready for me, which the Lord, the upright judge, Will give to me at that day: and not only to me, but to all those who have had love for his revelation.
Do your best to come to me before long:
For Demas has gone away from me, for love of this present life, and has gone to Thessalonica: Crescens has gone to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.
Only Luke is with me. Get Mark and take him with you; for he is of use to me in the work.
Tychicus I sent to Ephesus.
The coat which I did not take from Troas and which is with Carpus, get when you come, and the books, specially the papers.
Alexander the copper-worker did me much wrong: the Lord will give him the reward of his works:
But be on the watch for him, for he was violent in his attacks on our teaching.
At my first meeting with my judges, no one took my part, but all went away from me. May it not be put to their account.
But the Lord was by my side and gave me strength; so that through me the news might be given out in full measure, and all the Gentiles might give ear: and I was taken out of the mouth of the lion.
The Lord will keep me safe from every evil work and will give me salvation in his kingdom in heaven: to whom be glory for ever and ever. So be it.
Give my love to Prisca and Aquila and those of the house of Onesiphorus.
Erastus was stopping at Corinth; but Trophimus, when I last saw him was at Miletus, ill.
Do your best to come before the winter. Eubulus sends you his love, and Pudens and Linus and Claudia, and all the brothers.
The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be with you.
Paul, a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, in agreement with the faith of the saints of God and the full knowledge of what is true in harmony with religion,
In the hope of eternal life, which was made certain before eternal time, by the word of God who is ever true;
Who, in his time, made clear his word in the good news, of which, by the order of God our Saviour, I became a preacher;
To Titus, my true child in our common faith: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Saviour.
I did not take you with me when I went away from Crete, so that you might do what was necessary to put things in order there, placing men in authority over the churches in every town, as I said to you;
Men having a good record, husbands of one wife, whose children are of the faith, children of whom it may not be said that they are given to loose living or are uncontrolled.
For it is necessary for a Bishop to be a man of virtue, as God's servant; not pushing himself forward, not quickly moved to wrath or blows, not desiring profit for himself;
But opening his house freely to guests; a lover of what is good, serious-minded, upright, holy, self-controlled;
Keeping to the true word of the teaching, so that he may be able to give comfort by right teaching and overcome the arguments of the doubters.
For there are men who are not ruled by law; foolish talkers, false teachers, specially those of the circumcision,
By whom some families have been completely overturned; who take money for teaching things which are not right; these will have to be stopped.
One of their prophets has said, The men of Crete are ever false, evil beasts, lovers of food, hating work.
This witness is true. So say sharp words to them so that they may come to the right faith,
Giving no attention to the fictions of the Jews and the rules of men who have no true knowledge.
To the clean in heart all things are clean: but to those who are unclean and without faith nothing is clean; they become unclean in mind and in thought.
They say that they have knowledge of God, while by their acts they are turning their backs on him; they are hated by all, hard-hearted, and judged to be without value for any good work.
But let your words be in agreement with true and right teaching:
That old men are to be simple in their tastes, serious, wise, true in faith, in love, and of a quiet mind.
That old women are to be self-respecting in behaviour, not saying evil of others, not given to taking much wine, teachers of that which is good,
Training the younger women to have love for their husbands and children,
To be wise in mind, clean in heart, kind; working in their houses, living under the authority of their husbands; so that no evil may be said of the word of God.
To the young men give orders to be wise and serious-minded:
In all things see that you are an example of good works; holy in your teaching, serious in behaviour,
Saying true and right words, against which no protest may be made, so that he who is not on our side may be put to shame, unable to say any evil of us.
Servants are to be under the authority of their masters, pleasing them in all things, without argument;
Not taking what is not theirs, but giving clear signs of their good faith, in all things doing credit to the teaching of God our Saviour.
For the grace of God has come, giving salvation to all men,
Training us so that, turning away from evil and the desires of this world, we may be living wisely and uprightly in the knowledge of God in this present life;
Looking for the glad hope, the revelation of the glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ;
Who gave himself for us, so that he might make us free from all wrongdoing, and make for himself a people clean in heart and on fire with good works.
On all these points give teaching and help, and make clear what is right with all authority. Let all men give you honour.
Make clear to them that they are to put themselves under rulers and authorities, to do what they are ordered, to be ready for every good work,
To say no evil of any man, not to be fighters, to give way to others, to be gentle in behaviour to all men.
For in the past we were foolish, hard in heart, turned from the true way, servants of evil desires and pleasures, living in bad feeling and envy, hated and hating one another.
But when the mercy of God our Saviour, and his love to man was seen,
Not by works of righteousness which we did ourselves, but in the measure of his mercy, he gave us salvation, through the washing of the new birth and the giving of new life in the Holy Spirit,
Which he gave us freely through Jesus Christ our Saviour;
So that, having been given righteousness through grace, we might have a part in the heritage, the hope of eternal life.
This is a true saying; and it is my desire that you may give certain witness about these things, so that those who have had faith in God may give attention to good works. These things are good and of profit to men;
But have nothing to do with foolish questionings, and lists of generations, and fights and arguments about the law; for they are of no profit and foolish.
A man whose opinions are not those of the church, after a first and second protest, is to be kept out of your society;
Clearly he is in error and a sinner, being self-judged.
When I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, do your best to come to me at Nicopolis: for it is my purpose to be there for the winter.
Send Zenas, the man of law, and Apollos on their journey with all care, so that they may be in need of nothing.
And let our people go on with good works for necessary purposes, so that they may not be without fruit.
All who are with me send you their love. Give our love to our friends in the faith. Grace be with you all.
Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon, our dear helper in the faith,
And to Apphia, our sister, and to Archippus, our brother in God's army, and to the church in your house:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I give praise to God at all times and make prayer for you,
Hearing of the love and the faith which you have to the Lord Jesus and to all the saints;
That the faith which you have in common with them may be working with power, in the knowledge of every good thing in you, for Christ.
For I had great joy and comfort in your love, because the hearts of the saints have been made strong again through you, brother.
And so, though I might, in the name of Christ, give you orders to do what is right,
Still, because of love, in place of an order, I make a request to you, I, Paul, an old man and now a prisoner of Christ Jesus:
My request is for my child Onesimus, the child of my chains,
Who in the past was of no profit to you, but now is of profit to you and to me:
Whom I have sent back to you, him who is my very heart:
Though my desire was to keep him with me, to be my servant in the chains of the good news, in your place:
But without your approval I would do nothing; so that your good works might not be forced, but done freely from your heart.
For it is possible that for this reason he was parted from you for a time, so that you might have him for ever;
No longer as a servant, but more than a servant, a brother, very dear to me specially, but much more to you, in the flesh as well as in the Lord.
If then you take me to be your friend and brother, take him in as myself.
If he has done you any wrong or is in debt to you for anything, put it to my account.
I, Paul, writing this myself, say, I will make payment to you: and I do not say to you that you are in debt to me even for your life.
So brother, let me have joy of you in the Lord: give new life to my heart in Christ.
Being certain that you will do my desire, I am writing to you, in the knowledge that you will do even more than I say.
And make a room ready for me; for I am hoping that through your prayers I will be given to you.
Epaphras, my brother-prisoner in Christ Jesus, sends you his love;
And so do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my brother-workers.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. So be it.
In times past the word of God came to our fathers through the prophets, in different parts and in different ways;
But now, at the end of these days, it has come to us through his Son, to whom he has given all things for a heritage, and through whom he made the order of the generations;
Who, being the outshining of his glory, the true image of his substance, supporting all things by the word of his power, having given himself as an offering making clean from sins, took his seat at the right hand of God in heaven;
Having become by so much better than the angels, as the name which is his heritage is more noble than theirs.
To which of the angels did God say at any time, You are my Son, this day I have given you being? or, I will be his Father, and he will be my Son?
And again, when he is sending his only Son into the world, he says, Let all the angels of God give him worship.
And of the angels he says, Who makes his angels winds, and his servants flames of fire:
But of the Son he says, Your seat of power, O God, is for ever and ever; and the rod of your kingdom is a rod of righteousness.
You have been a lover of righteousness and a hater of evil; and so God, your God, has put the oil of joy on your head more than on the heads of those who are with you.
You, Lord, at the first did put the earth on its base, and the heavens are the works of your hands:
They will come to their end; but you are for ever; they will become old as a robe;
They will be rolled up like a cloth, even like a robe, and they will be changed: but you are the same and your years will have no end.
But of which of the angels has he said at any time, Take your seat at my right hand till I put all those who are against you under your feet?
Are they not all helping spirits, who are sent out as servants to those whose heritage will be salvation?
For this reason there is the more need for us to give attention to the things which have come to our ears, for fear that by chance we might be slipping away.
Because if the word which came through the angels was fixed, and in the past every evil act against God's orders was given its full punishment;
What will come on us, if we do not give our minds to such a great salvation? a salvation of which our fathers first had knowledge through the words of the Lord, and which was made certain to us by those to whom his words came;
And God was a witness with them, by signs and wonders, and by more than natural powers, and by his distribution of the Holy Spirit at his pleasure.
For he did not make the angels rulers over the world to come, of which I am writing.
But a certain writer has given his witness, saying, What is man, that you keep him in mind? what is the son of man, that you take him into account?
You made him a little lower than the angels; you gave him a crown of glory and honour, and made him ruler over all the works of your hands:
You put all things under his feet. For in making man the ruler over all things, God did not put anything outside his authority; though we do not see everything under him now.
But we see him who was made a little lower than the angels, even Jesus, crowned with glory and honour, because he let himself be put to death so that by the grace of God he might undergo death for all men.
Because it was right for him, for whom and through whom all things have being, in guiding his sons to glory, to make the captain of their salvation complete through pain.
For he who makes holy and those who are made holy are all of one family; and for this reason it is no shame for him to give them the name of brothers,
Saying, I will give the knowledge of your name to my brothers, I will make a song of praise to you before the church.
And again he says, I will put my faith in him. And again, See, I am here, and the children which God has given to me.
And because the children are flesh and blood, he took a body himself and became like them; so that by his death he might put an end to him who had the power of death, that is to say, the Evil One;
And let those who all their lives were in chains because of their fear of death, go free.
For, truly, he does not take on the life of angels, but that of the seed of Abraham.
Because of this it was necessary for him to be made like his brothers in every way, so that he might be a high priest full of mercy and keeping faith in everything to do with God, making offerings for the sins of the people.
For having been put to the test himself, he is able to give help to others when they are tested.
For this reason, holy brothers, marked out to have a part in heaven, give thought to Jesus the representative and high priest of our faith;
Who kept faith with God who gave him his place, even as Moses did in all his house.
And it was right for this man to have more honour than Moses, even as the builder of a house has more honour than the house.
For every house has a builder; but the builder of all things is God.
And Moses certainly kept faith as a servant, in all his house, and as a witness of those things which were to be said later;
But Christ as a son, over his house; whose house are we, if we keep our hearts fixed in the glad and certain hope till the end.
And so, as the Holy Spirit says, Today if you let his voice come to your ears,
Be not hard of heart, as when you made me angry, on the day of testing in the waste land,
When your fathers put me to the test, and saw my works for forty years.
So that I was angry with this generation, and I said, Their hearts are in error at all times, and they have no knowledge of my ways;
And being angry I made an oath, saying, They may not come into my rest.
My brothers, take care that there is not by chance in any one of you an evil heart without belief, turning away from the living God:
But give comfort to one another every day as long as it is still Today; so that no one among you may be made hard by the deceit of sin:
For if we keep the substance of the faith which we had at the start, even till the end, we have a part with Christ;
As it is said, Today if you will let his voice come to your ears, be not hard of heart, as when you made him angry.
Who made him angry when his voice came to them? was it not all those who came out of Egypt with Moses?
And with whom was he angry for forty years? was it not with those who did evil, who came to their deaths in the waste land?
And to whom did he make an oath that they might not come into his rest? was it not to those who went against his orders?
So we see that they were not able to go in because they had no belief.
Let us then, though we still have God's word that we may come into his rest, go in fear that some of you may be unable to do so.
And, truly, the good news came to us, even as it did to them; but the hearing of the word did them no good, because they were not united in faith with the true hearers.
For those of us who have belief come into his rest; even as he has said, As I said in my oath when I was angry, They may not come into my rest: though the works were done from the time of the making of the world.
For in one place he has said of the seventh day, And God had rest from all his works on the seventh day;
And in the same place he says again, They will not come into my rest.
So that as it is clear that some have to go in, and that the first hearers of the good news were not able to go in because they went against God's orders,
After a long time, again naming a certain day, he says in David, Today (as he had said before), Today if you will let his voice come to your ears, be not hard of heart,
For if Joshua had given them rest, he would not have said anything about another day.
So that there is still a Sabbath-keeping for the people of God.
For the man who comes into his rest has had rest from his works, as God did from his.
Because of this, let us have a strong desire to come into that rest, and let no one go after the example of those who went against God's orders.
For the word of God is living and full of power, and is sharper than any two-edged sword, cutting through and making a division even of the soul and the spirit, the bones and the muscles, and quick to see the thoughts and purposes of the heart.
And there is nothing made which is not completely clear to him; there is nothing covered, but all things are open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do.
Having then a great high priest, who has made his way through the heavens, even Jesus the Son of God, let us be strong in our faith.
For we have not a high priest who is not able to be touched by the feelings of our feeble flesh; but we have one who has been tested in all points as we ourselves are tested, but without sin.
Then let us come near to the seat of grace without fear, so that mercy may be given to us, and we may get grace for our help in time of need.
Every high priest who is taken from among men is given his position to take care of the interests of men in those things which have to do with God, so that he may make offerings for sins.
He is able to have feeling for those who have no knowledge and for those who are wandering from the true way, because he himself is feeble;
And being feeble, he has to make sin-offerings for himself as well as for the people.
And no man who is not given authority by God, as Aaron was, takes this honour for himself.
In the same way Christ did not take for himself the glory of being made a high priest, but was given it by him who said, You are my Son, this day I have given you being:
As he says in another place, You are a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.
Who in the days of his flesh, having sent up prayers and requests with strong crying and weeping to him who was able to give him salvation from death, had his prayer answered because of his fear of God.
And though he was a Son, through the pain which he underwent, the knowledge came to him of what it was to be under God's orders;
And when he had been made complete, he became the giver of eternal salvation to all those who are under his orders;
Being named by God a high priest of the order of Melchizedek.
Of whom we have much to say which it is hard to make clear, because you are slow of hearing.
And though by this time it would be right for you to be teachers, you still have need of someone to give you teaching about the first simple rules of God's revelation; you have become like babies who have need of milk, and not of solid food.
For everyone who takes milk is without experience of the word of righteousness: he is a child.
But solid food is for men of full growth, even for those whose senses are trained by use to see what is good and what is evil.
For this reason let us go on from the first things about Christ to full growth; not building again that on which it is based, that is, the turning of the heart from dead works, and faith in God,
The teaching of baptisms, and of the putting on of hands, and of the future life of the dead, and of the judging on the last day.
Now we will do this, if God lets us.
As for those who at one time saw the light, tasting the good things from heaven, and having their part in the Holy Spirit,
With knowledge of the good word of God, and of the powers of the coming time,
And then let themselves be turned away, it is not possible for their hearts to be made new a second time; because they themselves put the Son of God on the cross again, openly shaming him.
For a land, drinking in the frequent rain and producing good plants for those for whom it is worked, has a blessing from God:
But if it sends up thorns and evil plants, it is of no use and is ready to be cursed; its only end is to be burned.
But, my loved ones, though we say this, we are certain that you have better things in you, things which go with salvation;
For God is true, and will not put away from him the memory of your work and of your love for his name, in the help which you gave and still give to the saints.
And it is our desire that you may all keep the same high purpose in certain hope to the end:
So that you may not be slow in heart, but may take as your example those to whom God has given their heritage, because of their faith and their long waiting.
For when God made his oath to Abraham, because there was no greater oath, he made it by himself,
Saying, Be certain that I will give you my blessing, and make your numbers very great.
And so, when he had been waiting calmly for a long time, God's word to him was put into effect.
For men at all times make their oaths by what is greater; and any argument is ended by the decision of the oath.
So that when it was God's desire to make it specially clear to those who by his word were to have the heritage, that his purpose was fixed, he made it more certain with an oath;
So that we, who have gone in flight from danger to the hope which has been put before us, may have a strong comfort in two unchanging things, in which it is not possible for God to be false;
And this hope is like a strong band for our souls, fixed and certain, and going in to that which is inside the veil;
Where Jesus has gone before us, as a high priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.
For this Melchizedek, the king of Salem, a priest of the Most High God, who gave Abraham his blessing, meeting him when he came back after putting the kings to death,
And to whom Abraham gave a tenth part of everything which he had, being first named King of righteousness, and then in addition, King of Salem, that is to say, King of peace;
Being without father or mother, or family, having no birth or end to his life, being made like the Son of God, is a priest for ever.
Now see how great this man was, to whom our father Abraham gave a tenth part of what he had got in the fight.
And it is true that by the law, those of the sons of Levi who have the position of priests may take a tenth part of the people's goods; that is to say, they take it from their brothers though these are the sons of Abraham.
But this man, who was not of their family, took the tenth from Abraham, and gave a blessing to him to whom God had given his undertaking.
But there is no doubt that the less gets his blessing from the greater.
Now at the present time, men over whom death has power take the tenth; but then it was taken by one of whom it is witnessed that he is living.
And we may say that in Abraham, even Levi, who has a right to take the tenth part, gave it;
Because he was still in his father's body when Melchizedek came to him.
Now if it was possible for things to be made complete through the priests of the house of Levi (for the law was given to the people in connection with them), what need was there for another priest who was of the order of Melchizedek and not of the order of Aaron?
Because if the priests are changed, it is necessary to make a change in the law.
For he of whom these things are said comes of another tribe, of which no man has ever made offerings at the altar.
Because it is clear that our Lord comes out of Judah, and Moses said nothing about priests from that tribe.
And this is even more clear if a second priest has come up who is like Melchizedek,
That is to say, not made by a law based on the flesh, but by the power of a life without end:
For it has been witnessed of him, You are a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.
So the law which went before is put on one side, because it was feeble and without profit.
(Because the law made nothing complete), and in its place there is a better hope, through which we come near to God.
And as this is not without the taking of an oath
(For those were made priests without an oath, but this one was made a priest with an oath by him who says of him, The Lord gave his oath, which he will not take back, that you are a priest for ever);
By so much is it a better agreement which we have through Jesus.
And it is true that there have been a great number of those priests, because death does not let them go on for ever;
But this priest, because his life goes on for ever, is unchanging.
So that he is fully able to be the saviour of all who come to God through him, because he is ever living to make prayer to God for them.
It was right for us to have such a high priest, one who is holy and without evil, doing no wrong, having no part with sinners, and made higher than the heavens:
Who has no need to make offerings for sins every day, like those high priests, first for himself, and then for the people; because he did this once and for ever when he made an offering of himself.
The law makes high priests of men who are feeble; but the word of the oath, which was made after the law, gives that position to a Son, in whom all good is for ever complete.
Now of the things we are saying this is the chief point: We have such a high priest, who has taken his place at the right hand of God's high seat of glory in heaven,
As a servant of the holy things and of the true Tent, which was put up by God, not by man.
Now every high priest is given authority to take to God the things which are given and to make offerings; so that it is necessary for this man, like them, to have something for an offering.
If he had been on earth he would not have been a priest at all, because there are other priests who make the offerings ordered by the law;
Being servants of that which is a copy and an image of the things in heaven, as Moses, when he was about to make the Tent, had special orders from God: for, See, he said, that you make everything like the design which you saw in the mountain.
But now his position as priest is higher. because through him God has made a better agreement with man, based on the giving of better things.
For if that first agreement had been as good as possible, there would have been no place for a second.
For, protesting against them, he says, See, the days are coming when I will make a new agreement with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah;
Not like the agreement which I made with their fathers when I took them by the hand, to be their guide out of the land of Egypt; for they did not keep the agreement with me, and I gave them up, says the Lord.
For this is the agreement which I will make with the people of Israel after those days: I will put my laws into their minds, writing them in their hearts: and I will be their God, and they will be my people:
And there will be no need for every man to be teaching his brother, or his neighbour, saying, This is the knowledge of the Lord: for they will all have knowledge of me, great and small.
And I will have mercy on their evil-doing, and I will not keep their sins in mind.
When he says, A new agreement, he has made the first agreement old. But anything which is getting old and past use will not be seen much longer.
Now the first agreement had its rules of worship, and a holy order.
For the first Tent was made ready, having in it the vessels for the lights and the table and the ordering of the bread; and this is named the holy place.
And inside the second veil was the place which is named the Holy of holies;
Having a vessel of gold in it for burning perfumes, and the ark of the agreement, which was covered with gold and which had in it a pot made of gold for the manna, and Aaron's rod which put out buds, and the stones with the writing of the agreement;
And over it were the winged ones of glory with their wings covering the mercy-seat; about which it is not possible now to say anything in detail.
Now while these things were in existence, the priests went into the first Tent at all times, for prayer and the making of offerings.
But only the high priest went into the second, once a year, not without making an offering of blood for himself and for the errors of the people:
The Holy Spirit witnessing by this that the way into the holy place had not at that time been made open, while the first Tent was still in being;
And this is an image of the present time; when the offerings which are given are not able to make the heart of the worshipper completely clean,
Because they are only rules of the flesh, of meats and drinks and washings, which have their place till the time comes when things will be put right.
But now Christ has come as the high priest of the good things of the future, through this greater and better Tent, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this world,
And has gone once and for ever into the holy place, having got eternal salvation, not through the blood of goats and young oxen, but through his blood.
For if the blood of goats and oxen, and the dust from the burning of a young cow, being put on the unclean, make the flesh clean:
How much more will the blood of Christ, who, being without sin, made an offering of himself to God through the Holy Spirit, make your hearts clean from dead works to be servants of the living God?
And for this cause it is through him that a new agreement has come into being, so that after the errors under the first agreement had been taken away by his death, the word of God might have effect for those who were marked out for an eternal heritage.
Because where there is a testament, there has to be the death of the man who made it.
For a testament has effect after death; for what power has it while the man who made it is living?
So that even the first agreement was not made without blood.
For when Moses had given all the rules of the law to the people, he took the blood of goats and young oxen, with water and red wool and hyssop, and put it on the book itself and on all the people,
Saying, This blood is the sign of the agreement which God has made with you.
And the blood was put on the Tent and all the holy vessels in the same way.
And by the law almost all things are made clean with blood, and without blood there is no forgiveness.
For this cause it was necessary to make the copies of the things in heaven clean with these offerings; but the things themselves are made clean with better offerings than these.
For Christ did not go into a holy place which had been made by men's hands as the copy of the true one; but he went into heaven itself, and now takes his place before the face of God for us.
And he did not have to make an offering of himself again and again, as the high priest goes into the holy place every year with blood which is not his;
For then he would have undergone a number of deaths from the time of the making of the world: but now he has come to us at the end of the old order, to put away sin by the offering of himself.
And because by God's law death comes to men once, and after that they are judged;
So Christ, having at his first coming taken on himself the sins of men, will be seen a second time, without sin, by those who are waiting for him, for their salvation.
For the law, being only a poor copy of the future good things, and not the true image of those things, is never able to make the people who come to the altar every year with the same offerings completely clean.
For if this had been possible, would there not have been an end of those offerings, because the worshippers would have been made completely clean and would have been no longer conscious of sins?
But year by year there is a memory of sins in those offerings.
Because it is not possible for the blood of oxen and goats to take away sins.
So that when he comes into the world, he says, You had no desire for offerings, but you made a body ready for me;
You had no joy in burned offerings or in offerings for sin.
Then I said, See, I have come to do your pleasure, O God (as it is said of me in the roll of the book).
After saying, You had no desire for offerings, for burned offerings or offerings for sin (which are made by the law) and you had no pleasure in them,
Then he said, See, I have come to do your pleasure. He took away the old order, so that he might put the new order in its place.
By that pleasure we have been made holy, by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once and for ever.
And every priest takes his place at the altar day by day, doing what is necessary, and making again and again the same offerings which are never able to take away sins.
But when Jesus had made one offering for sins for ever, he took his place at the right hand of God;
And has been waiting there from that time, till all who are against him are made a foot-rest for his feet.
Because by one offering he has made complete for ever those who are made holy.
And the Holy Spirit is a witness for us: for after he had said,
This is the agreement which I will make with them after those days, says the Lord; I will put my laws in their hearts, writing them in their minds; he said,
And I will keep no more memory of their sins and of their evil-doings.
Now where there is forgiveness of these, there is no more offering for sin.
So then, my brothers, being able to go into the holy place without fear, because of the blood of Jesus,
By the new and living way which he made open for us through the veil, that is to say, his flesh;
And having a great priest over the house of God,
Let us go in with true hearts, in certain faith, having our hearts made free from the sense of sin and our bodies washed with clean water:
Let us keep the witness of our hope strong and unshaking, for he is true who has given his word:
And let us be moving one another at all times to love and good works;
Not giving up our meetings, as is the way of some, but keeping one another strong in faith; and all the more because you see the day coming near.
For if we do evil on purpose after we have had the knowledge of what is true, there is no more offering for sins,
But only a great fear of being judged, and of the fire of wrath which will be the destruction of the haters of God.
A man who has gone against the law of Moses is put to death without pity on the word of two or three witnesses:
But will not the man by whom the Son of God has been crushed under foot, and the blood of the agreement with which he was washed clean has been taken as an unholy thing, and who has had no respect for the Spirit of grace, be judged bad enough for a very much worse punishment?
For we have had experience of him who says, Punishment is mine, I will give reward. And again, The Lord will be judge of his people.
We may well go in fear of falling into the hands of the living God.
But give thought to the days after you had seen the light, when you went through a great war of troubles;
In part, in being attacked by angry words and cruel acts, before the eyes of everyone, and in part, in being united with those who were attacked in this way.
For you had pity on those who were in prison, and had joy in the loss of your property, in the knowledge that you still had a better property and one which you would keep for ever.
So do not give up your hope which will be greatly rewarded.
For, having done what was right in God's eyes, you have need of waiting before his word has effect for you.
In a very little time he who is coming will come; he will not be slow.
But the upright man will be living by his faith; and if he goes back, my soul will have no pleasure in him.
But we are not of those who go back to destruction; but of those who have faith even to the salvation of the soul.
Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the sign that the things not seen are true.
For by it our fathers had God's approval.
By faith it is clear to us that the order of events was fixed by the word of God, so that what is seen has not been made from things which only seem to be.
By faith Abel made a better offering to God than Cain, and he had witness through it of his righteousness, God giving his approval of his offering: and his voice still comes to us through it though he is dead.
By faith Enoch was taken up to heaven so that he did not see death; he was seen no longer, for God took him away: for before he was taken, witness had been given that he was well-pleasing to God:
And without faith it is not possible to be well-pleasing to him, for it is necessary for anyone who comes to God to have the belief that God is, and that he is a rewarder of all those who make a serious search for him.
By faith Noah, being moved by the fear of God, made ready an ark for the salvation of his family, because God had given him news of things which were not seen at the time; and through it the world was judged by him, and he got for his heritage the righteousness which is by faith.
By faith Abraham did as God said when he was ordered to go out into a place which was to be given to him as a heritage, and went out without knowledge of where he was going.
By faith he was a wanderer in the land of the agreement, as in a strange land, living in tents with Isaac and Jacob, who had a part with him in the same heritage:
For he was looking for the strong town, whose builder and maker is God.
And by faith Sarah herself had power to give birth, when she was very old, because she had faith in him who gave his word;
So that from one man, who was near to death, came children in number as the stars in heaven, or as the sand by the seaside, which may not be numbered.
All these came to their end in faith, not having had the heritage; but having seen it with delight far away, they gave witness that they were wanderers and not of the earth.
For those who say such things make it clear that they are searching for a country for themselves.
And truly if they had kept in mind the country from which they went out, they would have had chances of turning back.
But now their desire is for a better country, that is to say, for one in heaven; and so it is no shame to God to be named their God; for he has made ready a town for them.
By faith Abraham made an offering of Isaac, when he was tested: and he with whom the agreement had been made gave up as an offering the only son of his body,
Of whom it had been said, From Isaac will your seed take their name:
Judging that God was able to give life even to the dead; and because of this he did get him back as if from death.
By faith Isaac, blessing Jacob and Esau, gave news of things to come.
By faith Jacob gave a blessing to the two sons of Joseph, when he was near to death; and gave God worship, supported by his stick.
By faith Joseph, when his end was near, said that the children of Israel would go out of Egypt; and gave orders about his bones.
By faith Moses was kept secretly by his father and mother for three months after his birth, because they saw that he was a fair child; and they had no fear of the king's orders.
By faith Moses, when he became a man, had no desire to be named the son of Pharaoh's daughter;
Feeling that it was better to undergo pain with the people of God, than for a short time to have a taste of the pleasures of sin;
Judging a part in the shame of Christ to be better than all the wealth of Egypt; for he was looking forward to his reward.
By faith he went out of Egypt, not being turned from his purpose by fear of the wrath of the king; for he kept on his way, as seeing him who is unseen.
By faith he kept the Passover, and put the sign of the blood on the houses, so that the angel of destruction might not put their oldest sons to death.
By faith they went through the Red Sea as if it had been dry land, though the Egyptians were overcome by the water when they made an attempt to do the same.
By faith the walls of Jericho came down, after they had been circled for seven days.
By faith Rahab, the loose woman, was not put to death with those who had gone against God's orders, because she had taken into her house in peace those sent to see the land.
What more am I to say? For there would not be time to give the stories of Gideon, Barak, Samson, and Jephthah, of David and Samuel and the prophets:
Who through faith overcame kingdoms, did righteousness, got their reward, kept the mouths of lions shut,
Put out the power of fire, got safely away from the edge of the sword, were made strong when they had been feeble, became full of power in war, and put to flight the armies of the nations.
Women had their dead given back to them living; others let themselves be cruelly attacked, having no desire to go free, so that they might have a better life to come;
And others were tested by being laughed at or by blows, and even with chains and prisons:
They were stoned, they were cut up with knives, they were tested, they were put to death with the sword, they went about in sheepskins and in goatskins; being poor and in pain and cruelly attacked,
Wandering in waste places and in mountains and in holes in the rocks; for whom the world was not good enough.
And not one of these got the good things of the agreement, though they all had a good record through faith,
Because God had kept some better thing for us, so that it was not possible for them to become complete without us.
For this reason, as we are circled by so great a cloud of witnesses, putting off every weight, and the sin into which we come so readily, let us keep on running in the way which is marked out for us,
Having our eyes fixed on Jesus, the guide and end of our faith, who went through the pains of the cross, not caring for the shame, because of the joy which was before him, and who has now taken his place at the right hand of God's seat of power.
Give thought to him who has undergone so much of the hate of sinners against himself, so that you may not be tired and feeble of purpose.
Till now you have not given your blood in your fight against sin:
And you have not kept in mind the word which says to you as to sons, My son, do not make little of the Lord's punishment, and do not give up hope when you are judged by him;
For the Lord sends punishment on his loved ones; everyone whom he takes as his son has experience of his rod.
It is for your training that you undergo these things; God is acting to you as a father does to his sons; for what son does not have punishment from his father?
But if you have not that punishment of which we all have our part, then you are not true sons, but children of shame.
And again, if the fathers of our flesh gave us punishment and had our respect, how much more will we be under the authority of the Father of spirits, and have life?
For they truly gave us punishment for a short time, as it seemed good to them; but he does it for our profit, so that we may become holy as he is.
At the time all punishment seems to be pain and not joy: but after, those who have been trained by it get from it the peace-giving fruit of righteousness.
For this cause let the hands which are hanging down be lifted up, and let the feeble knees be made strong,
And make straight roads for your feet, so that the feeble may not be turned out of the way, but may be made strong.
Let your desire be for peace with all men, and to be made holy, without which no man may see the Lord;
Looking with care to see that no man among you in his behaviour comes short of the grace of God; for fear that some bitter root may come up to be a trouble to you, and that some of you may be made unclean by it;
And that there may not be any evil liver, or any man without respect for God, like Esau, who let his birthright go for a plate of food.
For you have knowledge that even long after, when he was desiring the blessing for his heritage, he was turned away, though he made his request frequently and with weeping; because the past might not be changed.
You have not come to a mountain which may be touched, and is burning with fire, and to a black cloud, and a dark smoke, and a violent wind,
And to the sound of a horn, and the voice of words, the hearers of which made request that not a word more might be said to them:
For the order which said, If the mountain is touched even by a beast, the beast is to be stoned, seemed hard to them;
And the vision was so overpowering that even Moses said, I am shaking and full of fear.
But you have come to the mountain of Zion, to the place of the living God, to the Jerusalem which is in heaven, and to an army of angels which may not be numbered,
To the great meeting and church of the first of those who are named in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of good men made complete,
And to Jesus by whom the new agreement has been made between God and man, and to the sign of the blood which says better things than Abel's blood.
See that you give ear to his voice which comes to you. For if those whose ears were shut to the voice which came to them on earth did not go free from punishment, what chance have we of going free if we give no attention to him whose voice comes from heaven?
Whose voice was the cause of the shaking of the earth; but now he has made an oath, saying, There will be still one more shaking, not only of the earth, but of heaven.
And the words, Still one more, make it clear that there will be a taking away of those things which are shaking, as of things which are made, so that there may be only those things of which no shaking is possible.
If then, we have a kingdom which will never be moved, let us have grace, so that we may give God such worship as is pleasing to him with fear and respect:
For our God is an all-burning fire.
Go on loving your brothers in the faith.
Take care to keep open house: because in this way some have had angels as their guests, without being conscious of it.
Keep in mind those who are in chains, as if you were chained with them, and those who are in trouble, as being yourselves in the body.
Let married life be honoured among all of you and not made unclean; for men untrue in married life will be judged by God.
Be free from the love of money and pleased with the things which you have; for he himself has said, I will be with you at all times.
So that we say with a good heart, The Lord is my helper; I will have no fear: what is man able to do to me?
Keep in mind those who were over you, and who gave you the word of God; seeing the outcome of their way of life, let your faith be like theirs.
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and for ever.
Do not be turned away by different strange teachings, because it is good for your hearts to be made strong by grace, and not by meats, which were of no profit to those who took so much trouble over them.
We have an altar from which those priests who are servants in the Tent may not take food.
For the bodies of the beasts whose blood is taken into the holy place by the high priest as an offering for sin are burned outside the circle of the tents.
For this reason Jesus was put to death outside the walls, so that he might make the people holy by his blood.
Let us then go out to him outside the circle of the tents, taking his shame on ourselves.
For here we have no fixed resting-place, but our search is for the one which is to come.
Let us then make offerings of praise to God at all times through him, that is to say, the fruit of lips giving witness to his name.
But go on doing good and giving to others, because God is well-pleased with such offerings.
Give ear to those who are rulers over you, and do as they say: for they keep watch over your souls, ready to give an account of them; let them be able to do this with joy and not with grief, because that would be of no profit to you.
Make prayers for us, for we are certain that our hearts are free from the sense of sin, desiring the right way of life in all things.
I make this request more strongly, in the hope of coming back to you more quickly.
Now may the God of peace, who made that great keeper of his flock, even our Lord Jesus, come back from the dead through the blood of the eternal agreement,
Make you full of every good work and ready to do all his desires, working in us whatever is pleasing in his eyes through Jesus Christ; and may the glory be given to him for ever and ever. So be it.
But, brothers, take kindly the words which I have said for your profit; for I have not sent you a long letter.
Our brother Timothy has been let out of prison; and if he comes here in a short time, he and I will come to you together.
Give words of love from me to those who are rulers over you, and to all the saints. Those who are in Italy send you their love.
May grace be with you all.
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, sends words of love to the twelve tribes of the Jews living in all parts of the earth.
Let it be all joy to you, my brothers, when you undergo tests of every sort;
Because you have the knowledge that the testing of your faith gives you the power of going on in hope;
But let this power have its full effect, so that you may be made complete, needing nothing.
But if any man among you is without wisdom, let him make his request to God, who gives freely to all without an unkind word, and it will be given to him.
Let him make his request in faith, doubting nothing; for he who has doubt in his heart is like the waves of the sea, which are troubled by the driving of the wind.
Let it not seem to such a man that he will get anything from the Lord;
For there is a division in his mind, and he is uncertain in all his ways.
But let the brother of low position be glad that he is lifted up;
But the man of wealth, that he is made low; because like the flower of the grass he will come to his end.
For when the sun comes up with its burning heat, the grass gets dry and the grace of its form is gone with the falling flower; so the man of wealth comes to nothing in his ways.
There is a blessing on the man who undergoes testing; because, if he has God's approval, he will be given the crown of life, which the Lord has said he will give to those who have love for him.
Let no man say when he is tested, I am tested by God; for it is not possible for God to be tested by evil, and he himself puts no man to such a test:
But every man is tested when he is turned out of the right way by the attraction of his desire.
Then when its time comes, desire gives birth to sin; and sin, when it is of full growth, gives birth to death.
Do not be turned from the right way, dear brothers.
Every good and true thing is given to us from heaven, coming from the Father of lights, with whom there is no change or any shade made by turning.
Of his purpose he gave us being, by his true word, so that we might be, in a sense, the first-fruits of all the things which he had made.
You have knowledge of this, dear brothers. But let every man be quick in hearing, slow in words, slow to get angry;
For the righteousness of God does not come about by the wrath of man.
For this reason, putting away all dirty behaviour and the overweight of evil, take into your souls without pride the word which, being planted there, is able to give you salvation.
But be doers of the word, and not only hearers of it, blinding yourselves with false ideas.
Because if any man is a hearer of the word and not a doer, he is like a man looking at his natural face in a glass;
For after looking at himself he goes away, and in a short time he has no memory of what he was like.
But he who goes on looking into the true law which makes him free, being not a hearer without memory but a doer putting it into effect, this man will have a blessing on his acts.
If a man seems to have religion and has no control over his tongue but lets himself be tricked by what is false, this man's religion is of no value.
The religion which is holy and free from evil in the eyes of our God and Father is this: to take care of children who have no fathers and of widows who are in trouble, and to keep oneself untouched by the world.
My brothers, if you have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ of glory, do not take a man's position into account.
For if a man comes into your Synagogue in fair clothing and with a gold ring, and a poor man comes in with dirty clothing,
And you do honour to the man in fair clothing and say, Come here and take this good place; and you say to the poor man, Take up your position there, or be seated at my feet;
Is there not a division in your minds? have you not become judges with evil thoughts?
Give ear, my dear brothers; are not those who are poor in the things of this world marked out by God to have faith as their wealth, and for their heritage the kingdom which he has said he will give to those who have love for him?
But you have put the poor man to shame. Are not the men of wealth rulers over you? do they not take you by force before their judges?
Do they not say evil of the holy name which was given to you?
But if you keep the greatest law of all, as it is given in the holy Writings, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself, you do well:
But if you take a man's position into account, you do evil, and are judged as evil-doers by the law.
For anyone who keeps all the law, but makes a slip in one point, is judged to have gone against it all.
For he who said, Do not be untrue in married life, is the same who said, Put no man to death. Now if you are not untrue in married life, but you put a man to death, the law is broken.
Let your words and your acts be those of men who are to be judged by the law which makes free.
For the man who has had no mercy will be judged without mercy, but mercy takes pride in overcoming judging.
What use is it, my brothers, for a man to say that he has faith, if he does nothing? will such a faith give him salvation?
If a brother or a sister is without clothing and in need of the day's food,
And one of you says to them, Go in peace, be warm and full of food; but you do not give them the things of which their bodies have need, what profit is there in this?
Even so faith without works is dead.
But a man may say, You have faith and I have works; let me see your faith without your works, and I will make my faith clear to you by my works.
You have the belief that God is one, and you do well: the evil spirits have the same belief, shaking with fear.
Do you not see, O foolish man, that faith without works is of no use?
Was not the righteousness of Abraham our father judged by his works, when he made an offering of Isaac his son on the altar?
You see that his faith was helping his works and was made complete by them;
And the holy Writings were put into effect which said, And Abraham had faith in God and it was put to his account as righteousness; and he was named the friend of God.
You see that a man's righteousness is judged by his works and not by his faith only.
And in the same way, was not the righteousness of Rahab, the loose woman, judged by her works, when she took into her house those who were sent and let them go out by another way?
For as the body without the spirit is dead even so faith without works is dead.
Do not all be teachers, my brothers, because we teachers will be judged more hardly than others.
For we all go wrong in a number of things. If a man never makes a slip in his talk, then he is a complete man and able to keep all his body in control.
Now if we put bits of iron into horses' mouths so that they may be guided by us, we have complete control of their bodies.
And again ships, though they are so great and are moved by violent winds, are turned by a very small guiding-blade, at the impulse of the man who is using it.
Even so the tongue is a small part of the body, but it takes credit for great things. How much wood may be lighted by a very little fire!
And the tongue is a fire; it is the power of evil placed in our bodies, making all the body unclean, putting the wheel of life on fire, and getting its fire from hell.
For every sort of beast and bird and every living thing on earth and in the sea has been controlled by man and is under his authority;
But the tongue may not be controlled by man; it is an unresting evil, it is full of the poison of death.
With it we give praise to our Lord and Father; and with it we put a curse on men who are made in God's image.
Out of the same mouth comes blessing and cursing. My brothers, it is not right for these things to be so.
Does the fountain send from the same outlet sweet and bitter water?
Is a fig-tree able to give us olives, my brothers, or do we get figs from a vine, or sweet water from the salt sea?
Who has wisdom and good sense among you? let him make his works clear by a life of gentle wisdom.
But if you have bitter envy in your heart and the desire to get the better of others, have no pride in this, talking falsely against what is true.
This wisdom is not from heaven, but is of the earth and the flesh and the Evil One.
For where envy is, and the desire to get the better of others, there is no order, but every sort of evil-doing.
But the wisdom which is from heaven is first holy, then gentle, readily giving way in argument, full of peace and mercy and good works, not doubting, not seeming other than it is.
And the fruit of righteousness is planted in peace for those who make peace.
What is the cause of wars and fighting among you? is it not in your desires which are at war in your bodies?
You are burning with desire, and have not your desire, so you put men to death; you are full of envy, and you are not able to get your desire, so you are fighting and making war; you have not your desire, because you do not make request for it.
You make your request but you do not get it, because your request has been wrongly made, desiring the thing only so that you may make use of it for your pleasure.
O you who are false to God, do you not see that the friends of this world are not God's friends? Every man desiring to be a friend of this world makes himself a hater of God.
Or does it seem to you that it is for nothing that the holy Writings say, The spirit which God put into our hearts has a strong desire for us?
But he gives more grace. So that the Writings say, God is against the men of pride, but he gives grace to those who make themselves low before him.
For this cause be ruled by God; but make war on the Evil One and he will be put to flight before you.
Come near to God and he will come near to you. Make your hands clean, you evil-doers; put away deceit from your hearts, you false in mind.
Be troubled, with sorrow and weeping; let your laughing be turned to sorrow and your joy to grief.
Make yourselves low in the eyes of the Lord and you will be lifted up by him.
Do not say evil against one another, my brothers. He who says evil against his brother or makes himself his brother's judge, says evil against the law and is judging the law: and in judging the law you become, not a doer of the law but a judge.
There is only one judge and law-giver, even he who has the power of salvation and of destruction; but who are you to be your neighbour's judge?
How foolish it is to say, Today or tomorrow we will go into this town, and be there for a year and do business there and get wealth:
When you are not certain what will take place tomorrow. What is your life? It is a mist, which is seen for a little time and then is gone.
But the right thing to say would be, If it is the Lord's pleasure and if we are still living, we will do this and that.
But now you go on glorying in your pride: and all such glorying is evil.
The man who has knowledge of how to do good and does not do it, to him it is sin.
Come now, you men of wealth, give yourselves to weeping and crying because of the bitter troubles which are coming to you.
Your wealth is unclean and insects have made holes in your clothing.
Your gold and your silver are wasted and their waste will be a witness against you, burning into your flesh. You have put by your store in the last days.
See, the money which you falsely kept back from the workers cutting the grass in your field, is crying out against you; and the cries of those who took in your grain have come to the ears of the Lord of armies.
You have been living delicately on earth and have taken your pleasure; you have made your hearts fat for a day of destruction.
You have given your decision against the upright man and have put him to death. He puts up no fight against you.
Go on waiting calmly, my brothers, till the coming of the Lord, like the farmer waiting for the good fruit of the earth till the early and late rains have come.
Be as calm in your waiting; let your hearts be strong: because the coming of the Lord is near.
Say no hard things against one another, brothers, so that you will not be judged; see, the judge is waiting at the doors.
Take as an example of pain nobly undergone and of strength in trouble, the prophets who gave to men the words of the Lord.
We say that those men who have gone through pain are happy: you have the story of Job and the troubles through which he went and have seen that the Lord was full of pity and mercy in the end.
But most of all, my brothers, do not take oaths, not by the heaven, or by the earth, or by any other thing: but let your Yes be Yes, and your No be No: so that you may not be judged.
Is anyone among you in trouble? let him say prayers. Is anyone glad? let him make a song of praise.
Is anyone among you ill? let him send for the rulers of the church; and let them say prayers over him, putting oil on him in the name of the Lord.
And by the prayer of faith the man who is ill will be made well, and he will be lifted up by the Lord, and for any sin which he has done he will have forgiveness.
So then, make a statement of your sins to one another, and say prayers for one another so that you may be made well. The prayer of a good man is full of power in its working.
Elijah was a man of flesh and blood as we are, and he made a strong prayer that there might be no rain; and there was no rain on the earth for three years and six months.
And he made another prayer, and the heaven sent down rain and the earth gave her fruit.
My brothers, if one of you has gone out of the way of the true faith and another has made him see his error,
Be certain that he through whom a sinner has been turned from the error of his way, keeps a soul from death and is the cause of forgiveness for sins without number.
Peter, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the saints who are living in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
Who, through the purpose of God, have been made holy by the Spirit, disciples of Jesus, made clean by his blood: May you have grace and peace in full measure.
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who through his great mercy has given us a new birth and a living hope by the coming again of Jesus Christ from the dead,
And a heritage fair, holy and for ever new, waiting in heaven for you,
Who, by the power of God are kept, through faith, for that salvation, which will be seen at the last day.
You have cause for great joy in this, though it may have been necessary for you to be troubled for a little time, being tested in all sorts of ways,
So that the true metal of your faith, being of much greater value than gold (which, though it comes to an end, is tested by fire), may come to light in praise and glory and honour, at the revelation of Jesus Christ:
To whom your love is given, though you have not seen him; and the faith which you have in him, though you do not see him now, gives you joy greater than words and full of glory:
For so you have the true end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.
For the prophets who gave the news of the grace which would come to you, made search with all care for knowledge of this salvation;
Attempting to see what sort of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them was pointing to, when it gave witness to the pains which Christ would undergo and the glories which would come after them.
And it was made clear to those prophets that they were God's servants not for themselves but for you, to give you word of the things which have now come to your ears from the preachers of the good news through the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven; things which even angels have a desire to see.
So make your minds ready, and keep on the watch, hoping with all your power for the grace which is to come to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ;
Like children ruled by God, do not go back to the old desires of the time when you were without knowledge:
But be holy in every detail of your lives, as he, whose servants you are, is holy;
Because it has been said in the Writings, You are to be holy, for I am holy.
And if you give the name of Father to him who, judging every man by his acts, has no respect for a man's position, then go in fear while you are on this earth:
Being conscious that you have been made free from that foolish way of life which was your heritage from your fathers, not through a payment of things like silver or gold which come to destruction,
But through holy blood, like that of a clean and unmarked lamb, even the blood of Christ:
Who was marked out by God before the making of the world, but was caused to be seen in these last times for you,
Who through him have faith in God who took him up again from the dead into glory; so that your faith and hope might be in God.
And as you have made your souls clean, being ruled by what is true, and loving one another without deceit, see that your love is warm and from the heart:
Because you have had a new birth, not from the seed of man, but from eternal seed, through the word of a living and unchanging God.
For it is said, All flesh is like grass, and all its glory like the flower of the grass. The grass becomes dry and the flower dead:
But the word of the Lord is eternal. And this is the word of the good news which was given to you.
So putting away all wrongdoing, and all tricks and deceits and envies and evil talk,
Be full of desire for the true milk of the word, as babies at their mothers' breasts, so that you may go on to salvation;
If you have had a taste of the grace of the Lord:
To whom you come, as to a living stone, not honoured by men, but of great and special value to God;
You, as living stones, are being made into a house of the spirit, a holy order of priests, making those offerings of the spirit which are pleasing to God through Jesus Christ.
Because it is said in the Writings, See, I am placing a keystone in Zion, of great and special value; and the man who has faith in him will not be put to shame.
And the value is for you who have faith; but it is said for those without faith, The very stone which the builders put on one side, was made the chief stone of the building;
And, A stone of falling, a rock of trouble; the word is the cause of their fall, because they go against it, and this was the purpose of God.
But you are a special people, a holy nation, priests and kings, a people given up completely to God, so that you may make clear the virtues of him who took you out of the dark into the light of heaven.
In the past you were not a people, but now you are the people of God; then there was no mercy for you, but now mercy has been given to you.
My loved ones, I make this request with all my heart, that, as those for whom this world is a strange country, you will keep yourselves from the desires of the flesh which make war against the soul;
Being of good behaviour among the Gentiles; so that though they say now that you are evil-doers, they may see your good works and give glory to God when he comes to be their judge.
Keep all the laws of men because of the Lord; those of the king, who is over all,
And those of the rulers who are sent by him for the punishment of evil-doers and for the praise of those who do well.
Because it is God's pleasure that foolish and narrow-minded men may be put to shame by your good behaviour:
As those who are free, not using your free position as a cover for wrongdoing, but living as the servants of God;
Have respect for all, loving the brothers, fearing God, honouring the king.
Servants, take orders from your masters with all respect; not only if they are good and gentle, but even if they are bad-humoured.
For it is a sign of grace if a man, desiring to do right in the eyes of God, undergoes pain as punishment for something which he has not done.
What credit is it if, when you have done evil, you take your punishment quietly? but if you are given punishment for doing right, and take it quietly, this is pleasing to God.
This is God's purpose for you: because Jesus himself underwent punishment for you, giving you an example, so that you might go in his footsteps:
Who did no evil, and there was no deceit in his mouth:
To sharp words he gave no sharp answer; when he was undergoing pain, no angry word came from his lips; but he put himself into the hands of the judge of righteousness:
He took our sins on himself, giving his body to be nailed on the tree, so that we, being dead to sin, might have a new life in righteousness, and by his wounds we have been made well.
Because, like sheep, you had gone out of the way; but now you have come back to him who keeps watch over your souls.
Wives, be ruled by your husbands; so that even if some of them give no attention to the word, their hearts may be changed by the behaviour of their wives,
When they see your holy behaviour in the fear of God.
Do not let your ornaments be those of the body such as dressing of the hair, or putting on of jewels of gold or fair clothing;
But let them be those of the unseen man of the heart, the ever-shining ornament of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is of great price in the eyes of God.
And these were the ornaments of the holy women of the past, whose hope was in God, being ruled by their husbands:
As Sarah was ruled by Abraham, naming him lord; whose children you are if you do well, and are not put in fear by any danger.
And you husbands, give thought to your way of life with your wives, giving honour to the woman who is the feebler vessel, but who has an equal part in the heritage of the grace of life; so that you may not be kept from prayer.
Last of all, see that you are all in agreement; feeling for one another, loving one another like brothers, full of pity, without pride:
Not giving back evil for evil, or curse for curse, but in place of cursing, blessing; because this is the purpose of God for you that you may have a heritage of blessing.
For it is said, Let the man who has a love of life, desiring to see good days, keep his tongue from evil and his lips from words of deceit:
And let him be turned from evil and do good; searching for peace and going after it with all his heart.
For the eyes of the Lord are on the upright, and his ears are open to their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against those who do evil.
Who will do you any damage if you keep your minds fixed on what is good?
But you are happy if you undergo pain because of righteousness; have no part in their fear and do not be troubled;
But give honour to Christ in your hearts as your Lord; and be ready at any time when you are questioned about the hope which is in you, to give an answer in the fear of the Lord and without pride;
Being conscious that you have done no wrong; so that those who say evil things about your good way of life as Christians may be put to shame.
Because if it is God's purpose for you to undergo pain, it is better to do so for well-doing than for evil-doing.
Because Christ once went through pain for sins, the upright one taking the place of sinners, so that through him we might come back to God; being put to death in the flesh, but given life in the Spirit;
By whom he went to the spirits in prison, preaching to those
Who, in the days of Noah, went against God's orders; but God in his mercy kept back the punishment, while Noah got ready the ark, in which a small number, that is to say eight persons, got salvation through water:
And baptism, of which this is an image, now gives you salvation, not by washing clean the flesh, but by making you free from the sense of sin before God, through the coming again of Jesus Christ from the dead;
Who has gone into heaven, and is at the right hand of God, angels and authorities and powers having been put under his rule.
So that as Jesus was put to death in the flesh, do you yourselves be of the same mind; for the death of the flesh puts an end to sin;
So that you may give the rest of your lives in the flesh, not to the desires of men, but to the purpose of God.
Because for long enough, in times past, we have been living after the way of the Gentiles, given up to the desires of the flesh, to drinking and feasting and loose behaviour and unclean worship of images;
And they are wondering that you no longer go with them in this violent wasting of life, and are saying evil things of you:
But they will have to give an account of themselves to him who is ready to be the judge of the living and the dead.
For this was the reason why the good news of Jesus was given even to the dead, so that they might be judged as men in the flesh, but might be living before God in the spirit.
But the end of all things is near: so be serious in your behaviour and keep on the watch with prayer;
And most of all be warm in your love for one another; because in love there is forgiveness for sins without number:
Keep open house for all with a glad heart;
Making distribution among one another of whatever has been given to you, like true servants of the unmeasured grace of God;
If anyone has anything to say, let it be as the words of God; if anyone has the desire to be the servant of others, let him do it in the strength which is given by God; so that in all things God may have the glory through Jesus Christ, whose are the glory and the power for ever.
Dear brothers, do not be surprised, as if it was something strange, if your faith is tested as by fire:
But be glad that you are given a part in the pains of Christ; so that at the revelation of his glory you may have great joy.
If men say evil things of you because of the name of Christ, happy are you; for the Spirit of glory and of God is resting on you.
Let no one among you undergo punishment as a taker of life, or as a thief, or as an evil-doer, or as one who is over-interested in other men's business;
But if he undergoes punishment as a Christian, that is no shame to him; let him give glory to God in this name.
For the time has come for the judging, starting with the church of God; but if it makes a start with us, what will be the end of those who are not under the rule of God?
And if it is hard for even the good man to get salvation, what chance has the man without religion or the sinner?
For this reason let those who by the purpose of God undergo punishment, keep on in well-doing and put their souls into the safe hands of their Maker.
I who am myself one of the rulers of the church, and a witness of the death of Christ, having my part in the coming glory, send this serious request to the chief men among you:
Keep watch over the flock of God which is in your care, using your authority, not as forced to do so, but gladly; and not for unclean profit but with a ready mind;
Not as lords over God's heritage, but making yourselves examples to the flock.
And at the coming of the chief Keeper of the sheep, you will be given the eternal crown of glory.
And in the same way, let the younger men be ruled by the older ones. Let all of you put away pride and make yourselves ready to be servants: for God is a hater of pride, but he gives grace to those who make themselves low.
For this cause make yourselves low under the strong hand of God, so that when the time comes you may be lifted up;
Putting all your troubles on him, for he takes care of you.
Be serious and keep watch; the Evil One, who is against you, goes about like a lion with open mouth in search of food;
Do not give way to him but be strong in your faith, in the knowledge that your brothers who are in the world undergo the same troubles.
And after you have undergone pain for a little time, the God of all grace who has given you a part in his eternal glory through Christ Jesus, will himself give you strength and support, and make you complete in every good thing;
His is the power for ever. So be it.
I have sent you this short letter by Silvanus, a true brother, in my opinion; comforting you and witnessing that this is the true grace of God; keep to it.
She who is in Babylon, who has a part with you in the purpose of God, sends you her love; and so does my son Mark.
Give one another the kiss of love. Peace be to you all in Christ.
Simon Peter, a servant and Apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who with us have a part in the same holy faith in the righteousness of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ:
May grace and peace ever be increasing in you, in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord;
Because by his power he has given us everything necessary for life and righteousness, through the knowledge of him who has been our guide by his glory and virtue;
And through this he has given us the hope of great rewards highly to be valued; so that by them we might have our part in God's being, and be made free from the destruction which is in the world through the desires of the flesh.
So, for this very cause, take every care; joining virtue to faith, and knowledge to virtue,
And self-control to knowledge, and a quiet mind to self-control, and fear of God to a quiet mind,
And love of the brothers to fear of God, and to love of the brothers, love itself.
For if you have these things in good measure, they will make you fertile and full of fruit in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For the man who has not these things is blind, seeing only what is near, having no memory of how he was made clean from his old sins.
For this reason, my brothers, take all the more care to make your selection and approval certain; for if you do these things you will never have a fall:
For so the way will be open to you into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
For this reason I will be ready at all times to keep your memory of these things awake, though you have the knowledge of them now and are well based in your present faith.
And it seems right to me, as long as I am in this tent of flesh, to keep your minds awake by working on your memory;
For I am conscious that in a short time I will have to put off this tent of flesh, as our Lord Jesus Christ has made clear to me.
And I will take every care so that you may have a clear memory of these things after my death.
For when we gave you news of the power and the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, our teaching was not based on stories put together by art, but we were eye-witnesses of his glory.
For God the Father gave him honour and glory, when such a voice came to him out of the great glory, saying, This is my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased.
And this voice came from heaven even to our ears, when we were with him on the holy mountain.
And so the words of the prophets are made more certain; and it is well for you to give attention to them as to a light shining in a dark place, till the dawn comes and the morning star is seen in your hearts;
Being conscious in the first place that no man by himself may give a special sense to the words of the prophets.
For these words did not ever come through the impulse of men: but the prophets had them from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit.
But there were false prophets among the people, as there will be false teachers among you, who will secretly put forward wrong teachings for your destruction, even turning away from the Lord who gave himself for them; whose destruction will come quickly, and they themselves will be the cause of it.
And a great number will go with them in their evil ways, through whom the true way will have a bad name.
And in their desire for profit they will come to you with words of deceit, like traders doing business in souls: whose punishment has been ready for a long time and their destruction is watching for them.
For if God did not have pity for the angels who did evil, but sent them down into hell, to be kept in chains of eternal night till they were judged;
And did not have mercy on the world which then was, but only kept safe Noah, a preacher of righteousness, with seven others, when he let loose the waters over the world of the evil-doers;
And sent destruction on Sodom and Gomorrah, burning them up with fire as an example to those whose way of life might in the future be unpleasing to him;
And kept safe Lot, the upright man, who was deeply troubled by the unclean life of the evil-doers
(Because the soul of that upright man living among them was pained from day to day by seeing and hearing their crimes):
The Lord is able to keep the upright safe in the time of testing, and to keep evil-doers under punishment till the day of judging;
But specially those who go after the unclean desires of the flesh, and make sport of authority. Ready to take chances, uncontrolled, they have no fear of saying evil of those in high places:
Though the angels, who are greater in strength and power, do not make use of violent language against them before the Lord.
But these men, like beasts without reason, whose natural use is to be taken and put to death, crying out against things of which they have no knowledge, will undergo that same destruction which they are designing for others;
For the evil which overtakes them is the reward of their evil-doing: such men take their pleasure in the delights of the flesh even in the daytime; they are like the marks of a disease, like poisoned wounds among you, feasting together with you in joy;
Having eyes full of evil desire, never having enough of sin; turning feeble souls out of the true way; they are children of cursing, whose hearts are well used to bitter envy;
Turning out of the true way, they have gone wandering in error, after the way of Balaam, the son of Beor, who was pleased to take payment for wrongdoing;
But his wrongdoing was pointed out to him: an ass, talking with a man's voice, put a stop to the error of the prophet.
These are fountains without water, and mists before a driving storm; for whom the eternal night is kept in store.
For with high-sounding false words, making use of the attraction of unclean desires of the flesh, they get into their power those newly made free from those who are living in error;
Saying that they will be free, while they themselves are the servants of destruction; because whatever gets the better of a man makes a servant of him.
For if, after they have got free from the unclean things of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again taken in the net and overcome, their last condition is worse than their first.
For it would have been better for them to have had no knowledge of the way of righteousness, than to go back again from the holy law which was given to them, after having knowledge of it.
They are an example of that true saying, The dog has gone back to the food it had put out, and the pig which had been washed to its rolling in the dirty earth.
My loved ones, this is now my second letter to you, and in this as in the first, I am attempting to keep your true minds awake;
So that you may keep in mind the words of the holy prophets in the past, and the law of the Lord and Saviour which was given to you by his Apostles.
Having first of all the knowledge that in the last days there will be men who, ruled by their evil desires, will make sport of holy things,
Saying, Where is the hope of his coming? From the death of the fathers till now everything has gone on as it was from the making of the world.
But in taking this view they put out of their minds the memory that in the old days there was a heaven, and an earth lifted out of the water and circled by water, by the word of God;
And that the world which then was came to an end through the overflowing of the waters.
But the present heaven and the present earth have been kept for destruction by fire, which is waiting for them on the day of the judging and destruction of evil men.
But, my loved ones, keep in mind this one thing, that with the Lord one day is the same as a thousand years, and a thousand years are no more than one day.
The Lord is not slow in keeping his word, as he seems to some, but he is waiting in mercy for you, not desiring the destruction of any, but that all may be turned from their evil ways.
But the day of the Lord will come like a thief; and in that day the heavens will be rolled up with a great noise, and the substance of the earth will be changed by violent heat, and the world and everything in it will be burned up.
Seeing then that all these things are coming to such an end, what sort of persons is it right for you to be, in all holy behaviour and righteousness,
Looking for and truly desiring the coming of the day of God, when the heavens will come to an end through fire, and the substance of the earth will be changed by the great heat?
But having faith in his word, we are looking for a new heaven and a new earth, which will be the resting-place of righteousness.
For this reason, my loved ones, as you are looking for these things, take great care that when he comes you may be in peace before him, free from sin and every evil thing.
And be certain that the long waiting of the Lord is for salvation; even as our brother Paul has said in his letters to you, from the wisdom which was given to him;
And as he said in all his letters, which had to do with these things; in which are some hard sayings, so that, like the rest of the holy Writings, they are twisted by those who are uncertain and without knowledge, to the destruction of their souls.
For this reason, my loved ones, having knowledge of these things before they take place, take care that you are not turned away by the error of the uncontrolled, so falling from your true faith.
But be increased in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. May he have glory now and for ever. So be it.
That which was from the first, which has come to our ears, and which we have seen with our eyes, looking on it and touching it with our hands, about the Word of life
(And the life was made clear to us, and we have seen it and are witnessing to it and giving you word of that eternal life which was with the Father and was seen by us);
We give you word of all we have seen and everything which has come to our ears, so that you may be united with us; and we are united with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ:
And we are writing these things to you so that our joy may be made complete.
This is the word which came to us from him and which we give to you, that God is light and in him there is nothing dark.
If we say we are joined to him, and are walking still in the dark, our words are false and our acts are untrue:
But if we are walking in the light, as he is in the light, we are all united with one another, and the blood of Jesus his Son makes us clean from all sin.
If we say that we have no sin, we are false to ourselves and there is nothing true in us.
If we say openly that we have done wrong, he is upright and true to his word, giving us forgiveness of sins and making us clean from all evil.
If we say that we have no sin, we make him false and his word is not in us.
My little children, I am writing these things to you so that you may be without sin. And if any man is a sinner, we have a friend and helper with the Father, Jesus Christ, the upright one:
He is the offering for our sins; and not for ours only, but for all the world.
And by this we may be certain that we have knowledge of him, if we keep his laws.
The man who says, I have knowledge of him, and does not keep his laws, is false, and there is nothing true in him:
But in every man who keeps his word, the love of God is made complete. By this we may be certain that we are in him:
He who says that he is living in him, will do as he did.
My loved ones, I do not give you a new law, but an old law which you had from the first; this old law is the word which came to your ears.
Again, I give you a new law, which is true in him and in you; for the night is near its end and the true light is even now shining out.
He who says that he is in the light, and has hate in his heart for his brother, is still in the dark.
He who has love for his brother is in the light, and there is no cause of error in him.
But he who has hate for his brother is in the dark, walking in the dark with no knowledge of where he is going, unable to see because of the dark.
I am writing to you, my children, because you have forgiveness of sins through his name.
I am writing to you, fathers, because you have knowledge of him who was from the first. I am writing to you, young men, because you have overcome the Evil One. I have sent a letter to you, children, because you have knowledge of the Father.
I have sent a letter to you, fathers, because you have knowledge of him who was from the first. I have sent a letter to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God is in you, and because you have overcome the Evil One.
Have no love for the world or for the things which are in the world. If any man has love for the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
Because everything in the world, the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father but of the world.
And the world and its desires is coming to an end: but he who does God's pleasure is living for ever.
Little children, it is the last hour; and as you were given word that the Antichrist would come, so now a number of Antichrists have come to you; and by this we are certain that it is the last hour.
They went out from us but they were not of us; if they had been of us they would still be with us: but they went out from us so that it might be made clear that they were not of us.
And you have the Spirit from the Holy One and you all have knowledge.
I have not sent you this letter because you have no knowledge of what is true, but because you have knowledge, and because that which is false has nothing in common with that which is true.
Who is false but he who says that Jesus is not the Christ? He is the Antichrist who has no belief in the Father or the Son.
He who has no belief in the Son has not the Father: he who makes clear his belief in the Son has the Father.
But as for you, keep in your hearts the things which were made clear to you from the first. If you keep these things in your hearts you will be kept in the Father and the Son.
And this is the hope which he gave you, even eternal life.
I am writing these things to you about those whose purpose is that you may be turned out of the true way.
As for you, the Spirit which he gave you is still in you, and you have no need of any teacher; but as his Spirit gives you teaching about all things, and is true and not false, so keep your hearts in him, through the teaching which he has given you.
And now, my children, keep your hearts in him; so that at his revelation, we may have no fear or shame before him at his coming.
If you have knowledge that he is upright, it is clear to you that everyone who does righteousness is his offspring.
See what great love the Father has given us in naming us the children of God; and such we are. For this reason the world does not see who we are, because it did not see who he was.
My loved ones, now we are children of God, and at present it is not clear what we are to be. We are certain that at his revelation we will be like him; for we will see him as he is.
And everyone who has this hope in him makes himself holy, even as he is holy.
Everyone who is a sinner goes against the law, for sin is going against the law.
And you have knowledge that he came to take away sin: and in him there is no sin.
Anyone who is in him does no sin; anyone who is a sinner has not seen him and has no knowledge of him.
My little children, let no man take you out of the true way: he who does righteousness is upright, even as he is upright;
The sinner is a child of the Evil One; for the Evil One has been a sinner from the first. And the Son of God was seen on earth so that he might put an end to the works of the Evil One.
Anyone who is a child of God does no sin, because he still has God's seed in him; he is not able to be a sinner, because God is his Father.
In this way it is clear who are the children of God and who are the children of the Evil One; anyone who does not do righteousness or who has no love for his brother, is not a child of God.
Because this is the word which was given to you from the first, that we are to have love for one another;
Not being of the Evil One like Cain, who put his brother to death. And why did he put him to death? Because his works were evil and his brother's works were good.
Do not be surprised, my brothers, if the world has no love for you.
We are conscious that we have come out of death into life because of our love for the brothers. He who has no love is still in death.
Anyone who has hate for his brother is a taker of life, and you may be certain that no taker of life has eternal life in him.
In this we see what love is, because he gave his life for us; and it is right for us to give our lives for the brothers.
But if a man has this world's goods, and sees that his brother is in need, and keeps his heart shut against his brother, how is it possible for the love of God to be in him?
My little children, do not let our love be in word and in tongue, but let it be in act and in good faith.
In this way we may be certain that we are true, and may give our heart comfort before him,
When our heart says that we have done wrong; because God is greater than our heart, and has knowledge of all things.
My loved ones, if our heart does not say that we have done wrong, we have no fear before him;
And he gives us all our requests, because we keep his laws and do the things which are pleasing in his eyes.
And this is his law, that we have faith in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love for one another, even as he said to us.
He who keeps his laws is in God and God is in him. And the Spirit which he gave us is our witness that he is in us.
My loved ones, do not put your faith in every spirit, but put them to the test, to see if they are from God: because a great number of false prophets have gone out into the world.
By this you may have knowledge of the Spirit of God: every spirit which says that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is of God:
And every spirit which does not say this is not from God: this is the spirit of Antichrist, of which you have had word; and it is in the world even now.
You are of God, my little children, and you have overcome them because he who is in you is greater than he who is in the world.
They are of the world, so their talk is the world's talk, and the world gives ear to them.
We are of God: he who has the knowledge of God gives ear to us; he who is not of God does not give ear to us. By this we may see which is the true spirit, and which is the spirit of error.
My loved ones, let us have love for one another: because love is of God, and everyone who has love is a child of God and has knowledge of God.
He who has no love has no knowledge of God, because God is love.
And the love of God was made clear to us when he sent his only Son into the world so that we might have life through him.
And this is love, not that we had love for God, but that he had love for us, and sent his Son to be an offering for our sins.
My loved ones, if God had such love for us, it is right for us to have love for one another.
No man has ever seen God: if we have love for one another, God is in us and his love is made complete in us:
And his Spirit which he has given us is the witness that we are in him and he is in us.
And we have seen and give witness that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.
Everyone who says openly that Jesus is the Son of God, has God in him and is in God.
And we have seen and had faith in the love which God has for us. God is love, and everyone who has love is in God, and God is in him.
In this way love is made complete in us, so that we may be without fear on the day of judging, because as he is, so are we in this world.
There is no fear in love: true love has no room for fear, because where fear is, there is pain; and he who is not free from fear is not complete in love.
We have the power of loving, because he first had love for us.
If a man says, I have love for God, and has hate for his brother, his words are false: for how is the man who has no love for his brother whom he has seen, able to have love for God whom he has not seen?
And this is the word which we have from him, that he who has love for God is to have the same love for his brother.
Everyone who has faith that Jesus is the Christ is a child of God: and everyone who has love for the Father has love for his child.
In this way, we are certain that we have love for the children of God, when we have love for God and keep his laws.
For loving God is keeping his laws: and his laws are not hard.
Anything which comes from God is able to overcome the world: and the power by which we have overcome the world is our faith.
Who is able to overcome the world but the man who has faith that Jesus is the Son of God?
This is he who came by water and by blood, Jesus Christ; not by water only but by water and by blood.
And the Spirit is the witness, because the Spirit is true.
There are three witnesses, the Spirit, the water, and the blood: and all three are in agreement.
If we take the witness of men to be true, the witness of God is greater: because this is the witness which God has given about his Son.
He who has faith in the Son of God has the witness in himself: he who has not faith in God makes him false, because he has not faith in the witness which God has given about his Son.
And his witness is this, that God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
He who has the Son has the life; he who has not the Son of God has not the life.
I have put these things in writing for you who have faith in the name of the Son of God, so that you may be certain that you have eternal life.
And we are certain that if we make any request to him which is right in his eyes, he will give ear to us:
And if we are certain that he gives ear to all our requests, we are equally certain that we will get our requests.
If a man sees his brother doing a sin which is not bad enough for death, let him make a prayer to God, and God will give life to him whose sin was not bad enough for death. There is a sin whose punishment is death: I do not say that he may make such a request then.
All evil-doing is sin: but death is not the punishment for every sort of sin.
We are certain that one who is a child of God will do no sin, but the Son of God keeps him so that he is not touched by the Evil One.
We are certain that we are of God, but all the world is in the power of the Evil One.
And we are certain that the Son of God has come, and has given us a clear vision, so that we may see him who is true, and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life.
My little children, keep yourselves from false gods.
I, a ruler in the church, send word to the noble sister who is of God's selection, and to her children, for whom I have true love; and not only I, but all who have knowledge of what is true;
Because of this true knowledge which is in us, and will be with us for ever:
May grace, mercy, and peace be with us from God the Father, and from Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in all true love.
It gave me great joy to see some of your children walking in the true way, even as we were ordered to do by the Father.
And now, my sister, I make a request to you, not sending you a new law, but the law which we had from the first, that we have love for one another.
And love is the keeping of his laws. This is the law which was given to you from the first, so that you might keep it.
Because a number of false teachers have gone out into the world, who do not give witness that Jesus Christ came in the flesh. Such a one is a false teacher and Antichrist.
Keep watch over yourselves, so that you do not make our work of no effect, but may get your full reward.
Anyone who goes on and does not keep to the teaching of Christ, has not God: he who keeps to the teaching has the Father and the Son.
If anyone comes to you not having this teaching, do not take him into your house or give him words of love:
For he who gives him words of love has a part in his evil works.
Having much to say to you, it is not my purpose to put it all down with paper and ink: but I am hoping to come to you, and to have talk with you face to face, so that your joy may be full.
The children of your noble sister, who is of God's selection, send you their love.
I, a ruler in the church, send word to the well loved Gaius, for whom I have true love.
My loved one, it is my prayer that you may do well in all things, and be healthy in body, even as your soul does well.
For it gave me great joy when some of the brothers came and gave witness that you had the true faith and were walking in the true way.
I have no greater joy than to have news that my children are walking in the true way.
My loved one, you are doing a good work in being kind to those brothers who come from other places;
Who have given witness to the church of your love for them: and you will do well to send them on their way well cared for, as is right for servants of God:
For they went out for love of the Name, taking nothing from the Gentiles.
So it is right for us to take in such men as guests, so that we may take our part in the work of the true faith.
I sent a letter to the church, but Diotrephes, whose desire is ever to have the first place among them, will not have us there.
So if I come, I will keep in mind the things he does, talking against us with evil words: and as if this was not enough, he does not take the brothers into his house, and those who are ready to take them in, he keeps from doing so, putting them out of the church if they do.
My loved one, do not be copying what is evil, but what is good. He who does good is of God: he who does evil has not seen God.
Demetrius has the approval of all men and of what is true: and we give the same witness, and you are certain that our witness is true.
I had much to say to you, but it is not my purpose to put it all down with ink and pen:
But I am hoping to see you in a short time, and to have talk with you face to face. May you have peace. Your friends here send you their love. Give my love to our friends by name.
Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and the brother of James, to those of God's selection who have been made holy by God the Father and are kept safe for Jesus Christ:
May mercy and peace and love be increased in you.
My loved ones, while my thoughts were full of a letter which I was going to send you about our common salvation, it was necessary for me to send you one requesting you with all my heart to go on fighting strongly for the faith which has been given to the saints once and for ever.
For certain men have come among you secretly, marked out before in the holy Writings for this evil fate, men without the fear of God, turning his grace into an unclean thing, and false to our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.
Now it is my purpose to put you in mind, though you once had knowledge of all these things, of how the Lord, having taken a people safely out of Egypt, later sent destruction on those who had no faith;
And the angels who did not keep to their kingdom but went out from the place which was theirs, he has put in eternal chains and in dark night till the great day of the judging.
Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the towns near them, having like these, given themselves up to unclean desires and gone after strange flesh, have been made an example, undergoing the punishment of eternal fire.
In the same way these dreamers make the flesh unclean, having no respect for authorities, and say evil of rulers.
Now when Michael, one of the chief angels, was fighting against the Evil One for the body of Moses, fearing to make use of violent words against him, he only said, May the Lord be your judge.
But these men say evil about such things as they have no knowledge of; and the things of which they have natural knowledge, like beasts without reason, are the cause of their destruction.
A curse on them! They have gone in the way of Cain, running uncontrolled into the error of Balaam for reward, and have come to destruction by saying evil against the Lord, like Korah.
These men are unseen rocks at your love-feasts, when they take part in them with you, keepers of sheep who without fear take the food of the sheep; clouds without water rushing before the wind, wasted trees without fruit, twice dead, pulled up by the roots,
Violent waves of the sea, streaming with their shame, wandering stars for whom the darkest night is kept in store for ever.
The prophet Enoch, who was the seventh after Adam, said of these men, The Lord came with tens of thousands of his saints,
To be the judge of all, and to give a decision against all those whose lives are unpleasing to him, because of the evil acts which they have done, and because of all the hard things which sinners without fear of God have said against him.
These are the men who make trouble, ever desiring change, going after evil pleasures, using high-sounding words, respecting men's position in the hope of reward.
But you, my loved ones, keep in memory the words which were said before by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,
How they said to you, In the last days there will be men who, guided by their evil desires, will make sport of holy things.
These are the men who make divisions, natural men, not having the Spirit.
But you, my loved ones, building yourselves up on your most holy faith, and making prayers in the Holy Spirit,
Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for life eternal through the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And have pity on those who are in doubt;
And to some give salvation, pulling them out of the fire; and on some have mercy with fear, hating even the clothing which is made unclean by the flesh.
Now to him who is able to keep you from falling, and to give you a place in his glory, free from all evil, with great joy,
To the only God our Saviour, through Jesus Christ our Lord, let us give glory and honour and authority and power, before all time and now and for ever. So be it.
The Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave him so that his servants might have knowledge of the things which will quickly take place: and he sent and made it clear by his angel to his servant John;
Who gave witness of the word of God, and of the witness of Jesus Christ, even of all the things which he saw.
A blessing be on the reader, and on those who give ear to the prophet's words, and keep the things which he has put in the book: for the time is near.
John to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace to you and peace, from him who is and was and is to come; and from the seven Spirits which are before his high seat;
And from Jesus Christ, the true witness, the first to come back from the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To him who had love for us and has made us clean from our sins by his blood;
And has made us to be a kingdom and priests to his God and Father; to him let glory and power be given for ever and ever. So be it.
See, he comes with the clouds, and every eye will see him, and those by whom he was wounded; and all the tribes of the earth will be sorrowing because of him. Yes, so be it.
I am the First and the Last, says the Lord God who is and was and is to come, the Ruler of all.
I, John, your brother, who have a part with you in the trouble and the kingdom and the quiet strength of Jesus, was in the island which is named Patmos, for the word of God and the witness of Jesus.
I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and a great voice at my back, as of a horn, came to my ears,
Saying, What you see, put in a book, and send it to the seven churches; to Ephesus and to Smyrna and to Pergamos and to Thyatira and to Sardis and to Philadelphia and to Laodicea.
And turning to see the voice which said these words to me, I saw seven gold vessels with lights burning in them;
And in the middle of them one like a son of man, clothed with a robe down to his feet, and with a band of gold round his breasts.
And his head and his hair were white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire;
And his feet like polished brass, as if it had been burned in a fire; and his voice was as the sound of great waters.
And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth came a sharp two-edged sword: and his face was like the sun shining in its strength.
And when I saw him, I went down on my face at his feet as one dead. And he put his right hand on me, saying, Have no fear; I am the first and the last and the Living one;
And I was dead, and see, I am living for ever, and I have the keys of death and of Hell.
Put in writing, then, the things which you have seen, and the things which are, and the things which will be after these;
The secret of the seven stars which you saw in my right hand, and of the seven gold vessels with burning lights. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches: and the seven lights are the seven churches.
To the angel of the church in Ephesus say: These things says he who has the seven stars in his right hand, who is walking in the middle of the seven gold lights:
I have knowledge of your doings, and of your hard work and long waiting, and that you will not put up with evil men, and have put to the test those who say they are Apostles and are not, and have seen that they are false;
And you have the power of waiting, and have undergone trouble because of my name, without weariness.
But I have this against you, that you are turned away from your first love.
So keep in mind where you were at first, and be changed in heart and do the first works; or I will come to you, and will take away your light from its place, if your hearts are not changed.
But at least you have the credit of hating the works of the Nicolaitans, as I do.
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches. To him who overcomes I will give of the fruit of the tree of life, which is in the Paradise of God.
And to the angel of the church in Smyrna say: These things says the first and the last, who was dead and is living:
I have knowledge of your troubles and how poor you are (but you have true wealth), and the evil words of those who say they are Jews, and are not, but are a Synagogue of Satan.
Have no fear of the things which you will have to undergo: see, the Evil One will send some of you into prison, so that you may be put to the test; and you will have great trouble for ten days. Be true till death, and I will give you the crown of life.
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches. He who overcomes will not come under the power of the second death.
And to the angel of the church in Pergamos say: These things says he who has the sharp two-edged sword:
I have knowledge that your living-place is where Satan has his seat: and you are true to my name, and were not turned away from your faith in me, even in the days of Antipas, my true witness, who was put to death among you, where Satan has his place.
But I have some things against you, because you have with you those who keep the teaching of Balaam, by whose suggestion Balak made the children of Israel go out of the right way, taking food which was offered to false gods, and going after the desires of the flesh.
And you have those who keep the teaching of the Nicolaitans.
See, then, that you have a change of heart; or I will come to you quickly, and will make war against them with the sword of my mouth.
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches. To him who overcomes I will give of the secret manna, and I will give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name, of which no one has knowledge but he to whom it is given.
And to the angel of the church in Thyatira say: These things says the Son of God, whose eyes are like a flame of fire, and his feet like polished brass:
I have knowledge of your works, and your love and faith and help and strength in trouble, and that your last works are more than the first.
But I have this against you, that you let the woman Jezebel say she is a prophet and give false teaching, making my servants go after the desires of the flesh and take food offered to false gods.
And I gave her time for a change of heart, but she has no mind to give up her unclean ways.
See, I will put her into a bed, and those who make themselves unclean with her, into great trouble, if they go on with her works.
And I will put her children to death; and all the churches will see that I am he who makes search into the secret thoughts and hearts of men: and I will give to every one of you the reward of your works.
But to you I say, to the rest in Thyatira, even to those who have not this teaching, and have no knowledge of the secrets of Satan, as they say; I put on you no other weight.
But what you have, keep safe till I come.
He who overcomes, and keeps my works to the end, to him I will give rule over the nations,
And he will be ruling them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of the potter they will be broken, even as I have power from my Father:
And I will give him the morning star.
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches.
And to the angel of the church in Sardis say: These things says he who has the seven Spirits of God and the seven stars: I have knowledge of your works, that you seem to be living but are dead.
Be on the watch, and make strong the rest of the things which are near to death; because as judged by me your works have not come up to God's measure.
Keep in mind, then, the teaching which was given to you, and be ruled by it and have a change of heart. If then you do not keep watch, I will come like a thief, and you will have no knowledge of the hour when I will come on you.
But you have some names in Sardis who have kept clean their robes; and as a reward they will go in white with me.
He who overcomes will be dressed in white, and I will not take his name from the book of life, and I will give witness to his name before my Father, and before his angels.
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches.
And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia say: These things says he who is holy, he who is true, he who has the key of David, opening the door so that it may be shut by no one, and shutting it so that it may be open to no one.
I have knowledge of your works (see, I have put before you an open door which may be shut by no one), and that you have a little strength, and have kept my word, and have been true to my name.
See, I will make those of the Synagogue of Satan who say they are Jews, and are not, but say what is false; I will make them come and give worship before your feet, and see my love for you.
Because you have kept my word in quiet strength, I will keep you from the hour of testing which is coming on all the world, to put to the test those who are on earth.
I come quickly: keep that which you have, so that no one may take your crown.
Him who overcomes I will make a pillar in the house of my God, and he will go out no more: and I will put on him the name of my God, and the name of the town of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God, and my new name.
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches.
And to the angel of the church in Laodicea say: These things says the true and certain witness, the head of God's new order:
I have knowledge of your works, that you are not cold or warm: it would be better if you were cold or warm.
So because you are not one thing or the other, I will have no more to do with you.
For you say, I have wealth, and have got together goods and land, and have need of nothing; and you are not conscious of your sad and unhappy condition, that you are poor and blind and without clothing.
If you are wise you will get from me gold tested by fire, so that you may have true wealth; and white robes to put on, so that your shame may not be seen; and oil for your eyes, so that you may see.
To all those who are dear to me, I give sharp words and punishment: then with all your heart have sorrow for your evil ways.
See, I am waiting at the door and giving the sign; if my voice comes to any man's ears and he makes the door open, I will come in to him, and will take food with him and he with me.
To him who overcomes I will give a place with me on my high seat, even as I overcame, and am seated with my Father on his high seat.
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches.
After these things I saw a door open in heaven, and the first voice came to my ears, like the sound of a horn, saying, Come up here, and I will make clear to you the things which are to come.
Straight away I was in the Spirit: and I saw a high seat in heaven, and one was seated on it;
And to my eyes he was like a jasper and a sardius stone: and there was an arch of light round the high seat, like an emerald.
And round about the high seat were four and twenty seats: and on them I saw four and twenty rulers seated, clothed in white robes; and on their heads crowns of gold.
And out of the high seat came flames and voices and thunders. And seven lights of fire were burning before the high seat, which are the seven Spirits of God;
And before the high seat there was, as it seemed, a clear sea of glass; and in the middle of the high seat, and round about it, four beasts full of eyes round about.
And the first beast was like a lion, and the second like an ox, and the third had a face like a man, and the fourth was like an eagle in flight.
And the four beasts, having every one of them six wings, are full of eyes round about and inside: and without resting day and night, they say, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God, Ruler of all, who was and is and is to come.
And when the beasts give glory and honour to him who is seated on the high seat, to him who is living for ever and ever,
The four and twenty rulers go down on their faces before him who is seated on the high seat, and give worship to him who is living for ever and ever, and take off their crowns before the high seat, saying,
It is right, our Lord and our God, for you to have glory and honour and power: because by you were all things made, and by your desire they came into being.
And I saw in the right hand of him who was seated on the high seat, a book with writing inside it and on the back, shut with seven stamps of wax.
And I saw a strong angel saying in a loud voice, Who is able to make the book open, and to undo its stamps?
And no one in heaven, or on the earth, or under the earth, was able to get the book open, or to see what was in it.
And I was very sad, because there was no one able to get the book open or to see what was in it.
And one of the rulers said to me, Do not be sad: see, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has overcome, and has power to undo the book and its seven stamps.
And I saw in the middle of the high seat and of the four beasts, and in the middle of the rulers, a Lamb in his place, which seemed as if it had been put to death, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent out into all the earth.
And he came and took it out of the right hand of him who was seated on the high seat.
And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and the four and twenty rulers went down on their faces before the Lamb, having every one an instrument of music, and gold vessels full of perfumes, which are the prayers of the saints.
And their voices are sounding in a new song, saying, It is right for you to take the book and to make it open: for you were put to death and have made an offering to God of your blood for men of every tribe, and language, and people, and nation,
And have made them a kingdom and priests to our God, and they are ruling on the earth.
And I saw, and there came to my ears the sound of a great number of angels round about the high seat and the beasts and the rulers; and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands;
Saying with a great voice, It is right to give to the Lamb who was put to death, power and wealth and wisdom and strength and honour and glory and blessing.
And to my ears came the voice of everything in heaven and on earth and under the earth and in the sea, and of all things which are in them, saying, To him who is seated on the high seat, and to the Lamb, may blessing and honour and glory and power be given for ever and ever.
And the four beasts said, So be it. And the rulers went down on their faces and gave worship.
And I saw when the Lamb undid one of the stamps, and the voice of one of the four beasts came to my ears, saying as with a voice of thunder, Come and see.
And I saw a white horse, and he who was seated on it had a bow; and there was given to him a crown: and he went out with power to overcome.
And when the second stamp was undone, the voice of the second beast came to my ears, saying, Come and see.
And another horse came out, a red horse; and it was given to him who was seated on it to take peace from the earth, so that people might put one another to death: and there was given to him a great sword.
And when the third stamp was undone, the voice of the third beast came to my ears, saying, Come and see. And I saw a black horse; and he who was seated on it had scales in his hand.
And a voice came to my ears, from the middle of the four beasts, saying, A measure of grain for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny: and see that you do no damage to the oil and the wine.
And when the fourth stamp was undone, the voice of the fourth beast came to my ears, saying, Come and see.
And I saw a grey horse, and the name of him who was seated on it was Death; and Hell came after him. And there was given to them authority over the fourth part of the earth, to put to destruction by the sword, and by taking away their food, and by death, and by the beasts of the earth.
And when the fifth stamp was undone, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been put to death for the word of God, and for the witness which they kept.
And they gave a great cry, saying, How long will it be, O Ruler, holy and true, before you take your place as judge and give punishment for our blood to those on the earth?
And there was given to every one a white robe, and they were ordered to take their rest for a little time, till the number was complete of the other servants, their brothers, who would be put to death, even as they had been.
And I saw when the sixth stamp was undone, and there was a great earth-shock; and the sun became black as haircloth, and all the moon became as blood;
And the stars of heaven were falling to the earth, like green fruit from a tree before the force of a great wind.
And the heaven was taken away like the roll of a book when it is rolled up; and all the mountains and islands were moved out of their places.
And the kings of the earth, and the rulers, and the chief captains, and the men of wealth, and the strong, and every servant and free man, took cover in the holes and the rocks of the mountains;
And they say to the mountains and to the rocks, Come down on us, covering us from the face of him who is seated on the high seat, and from the wrath of the Lamb:
For the great day of their wrath is come, and who may keep his place?
After this I saw four angels in their places at the four points of the earth, keeping back the four winds in their hands, so that there might be no moving of the wind on the earth, or on the sea, or on any tree.
And I saw another angel coming up from the east, having the mark of the living God: and he said with a great voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to do damage to the earth and the sea,
Do no damage to the earth, or the sea, or the trees, till we have put a mark on the servants of our God.
And there came to my ears the number of those who had the mark on their brows, a hundred and forty-four thousand, who were marked out of every tribe of the people of Israel.
Of the tribe of Judah were marked twelve thousand: of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand: of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand:
Of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand: of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand: of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand:
Of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand: of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand: of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand:
Of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand: of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand: of the tribe of Benjamin were marked twelve thousand.
After these things I saw a great army of people more than might be numbered, out of every nation and of all tribes and peoples and languages, taking their places before the high seat and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes, and with branches in their hands,
Saying with a loud voice, Salvation to our God who is seated on the high seat, and to the Lamb.
And all the angels were round about the high seat, and about the rulers and the four beasts; and they went down on their faces before the high seat, and gave worship to God, saying,
So be it. Let blessing and glory and wisdom and praise and honour and power and strength be given to our God for ever and ever. So be it.
And one of the rulers made answer, saying to me, These who have on white robes, who are they, and where did they come from?
And I said to him, My lord, you have knowledge. And he said to me, These are they who came through the great testing, and their robes have been washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb.
This is why they are before the high seat of God; and they are his servants day and night in his house: and he who is seated on the high seat will be a tent over them.
They will never be in need of food or drink: and they will never again be troubled by the burning heat of the sun:
For the Lamb who is on the high seat will be their keeper and their guide to fountains of living water: and God will make glad their eyes for ever.
And when the seventh stamp was undone there was quiet in heaven for about half an hour.
And I saw the seven angels who had their place before God; and seven horns were given to them.
And another angel came and took his place at the altar, having a gold vessel for burning perfume; and there was given to him much perfume, so that he might put it with the prayers of all the saints on the gold altar which was before the high seat.
And the smoke of the perfume, with the prayers of the saints, went up before God out of the angel's hand.
And the angel took the vessel; and he made it full of the fire of the altar, and sent it down on the earth: and there came thunders and voices and flames and a shaking of the earth.
And the seven angels who had the seven horns made ready for sounding them.
And at the sounding of the first, a rain of ice and fire, mixed with blood, was sent on the earth: and a third part of the earth, and of the trees, and all green grass was burned up.
And at the sounding of the second angel, it was as if a great mountain burning with fire was sent into the sea: and a third part of the sea became blood,
And destruction came on a third part of the living things which were in the sea, and on a third part of the ships.
And at the sounding of the third angel, there went down from heaven a great star, burning like a flame, and it came on a third part of the rivers, and on the fountains of water.
And the name of the star is Wormwood: and a third part of the waters became bitter; and a number of men came to their end because of the waters, for they were made bitter.
And at the sounding of the fourth angel, a third part of the sun, and of the moon, and of the stars was made dark, so that there was no light for a third part of the day and of the night.
And there came to my ears the cry of an eagle in flight in the middle of heaven, saying with a great voice, Trouble, trouble, trouble, to all on the earth, because of the other voices of the horns of the three angels, whose sounding is still to come.
And at the sounding of the fifth angel I saw a star falling from heaven to the earth: and there was given to him the key of the great deep.
And he made the great deep open and a smoke went up from it, like the smoke of a great oven; and the sun and the air were made dark because of the smoke.
And from the smoke locusts came out on the earth; and power was given them, like the power of scorpions.
And they were ordered to do no damage to the grass of the earth, or any green thing, or any tree, but only to such men as have not the mark of God on their brows.
And orders were given them not to put them to death, but to give them great pain for five months: and their pain was as the pain from the wound of a scorpion.
And in those days men will be hoping for death, and it will not come to them; and they will have a great desire for death, and death will go in flight from them.
And the forms of the locusts were like horses made ready for war; and on their heads they had crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men.
And they had hair like the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of lions.
And they had breastplates like iron, and the sound of their wings was as the sound of carriages, like an army of horses rushing to the fight.
And they have pointed tails like scorpions; and in their tails is their power to give men wounds for five months.
They have over them as king the angel of the great deep: his name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in the Greek language Apollyon.
The first Trouble is past: see, there are still two Troubles to come.
And at the sounding of the sixth angel a voice came to my ears from the horns of the gold altar which is before God,
Saying to the sixth angel who had the horn, Make free the four angels who are chained at the great river Euphrates.
And the four angels were made free, who were ready for the hour and day and month and year, that they might put to death a third part of men.
And the number of the armies of the horsemen was twice ten thousand times ten thousand: the number of them came to my ears.
And so I saw the horses in the vision, and those who were seated on them, having breastplates of fire and glass and of burning stone: and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of their mouths came fire and smoke and a smell of burning.
By these evils a third part of men was put to death, by the fire, and the smoke, and the burning smell which came out of their mouths.
For the power of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails: because their tails are like snakes, and have heads, and with them they give wounds.
And the rest of the people, who were not put to death by these evils, were not turned from the works of their hands, but went on giving worship to evil spirits, and images of gold and silver and brass and stone and wood which have no power of seeing or hearing or walking:
And they had no regret for putting men to death, or for their use of secret arts, or for the evil desires of the flesh, or for taking the property of others.
And I saw another strong angel coming down out of heaven, clothed with a cloud; and an arch of coloured light was round his head, and his face was like the sun, and his feet like pillars of fire;
And he had in his hand a little open book: and he put his right foot on the sea, and his left on the earth;
And he gave a loud cry, like the angry voice of a lion: and at his cry the voices of the seven thunders were sounding.
And when the seven thunders had given out their voices, I was about to put their words down: and a voice from heaven came to my ears, saying, Keep secret the things which the seven thunders said, and do not put them in writing.
And the angel which I saw taking his position on the sea and on the earth, put up his right hand to heaven,
And took his oath by him who is living for ever and ever, who made the heaven and the things in it, and the earth and the things in it, and the sea and the things in it, that there would be no more waiting:
But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when the sound of his horn is about to come, then will the secret of God be complete, of which he gave the good news to his servants the prophets.
And the voice came to me again from heaven, saying, Go, take the book which is open in the hand of the angel who has his place on the sea and on the earth.
And I went to the angel, and said to him, Give me the little book. And he said to me: Put it in your mouth; and it will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth it will be sweet as honey.
And I took the little book out of the angel's hand and did as he said; and it was sweet as honey in my mouth: and when I had taken it, my stomach was made bitter.
And they said to me, You are to give word again of what is coming in the future to the peoples and nations and languages and kings.
And there was given to me a measuring rod: and one said, Go up and take the measure of the house of God, and the altar, and the worshippers in it.
But do not take the measure of the space outside the house; because it has been given to the nations: and the holy town will be under their feet for forty-two months.
And I will give orders to my two witnesses, and they will be prophets for a thousand, two hundred and sixty days, clothed with haircloth.
These are the two olive-trees and the two lights, which are before the Lord of the earth.
And if any man would do them damage, fire comes out of their mouth and puts an end to those who are working against them: and if any man has a desire to do them damage, in this way will he be put to death.
These have the power to keep the heaven shut, so that there may be no rain in the days when they are prophets: and they have power over the waters to make them into blood, and to send every sort of disease on the earth as their pleasure is.
And when they have come to the end of their witness, the beast which comes up out of the great deep will make war on them and overcome them and put them to death.
And their dead bodies will be in the open street of the great town, which in the spirit is named Sodom and Egypt, where their Lord was put to death on the cross.
And the peoples and tribes and languages and nations will be looking on their dead bodies three days and a half, and will not let their dead bodies be put in the earth.
And those who are on the earth will have pleasure and delight over them; and they will send offerings one to another because these two prophets gave great trouble to all on the earth.
And after three days and a half the breath of life from God went into them, and they got up on their feet; and great fear came on those who saw them.
And a great voice from heaven came to their ears, saying to them, Come up here. And they went up into heaven in the cloud, and were seen by those desiring their death.
And in that hour there was a great earth-shock and a tenth part of the town came to destruction; and in the earth-shock seven thousand persons came to their end: and the rest were in fear, and gave glory to the God of heaven.
The second Trouble is past: see, the third Trouble comes quickly.
And at the sounding of the seventh angel there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he will have rule for ever and ever.
And the four and twenty rulers, who are seated before God on their high seats, went down on their faces and gave worship to God, saying,
We give you praise, O Lord God, Ruler of all, who is and who was; because you have taken up your great power and are ruling your kingdom.
And the nations were angry, and your wrath has come, and the time for the dead to be judged, and the time of reward for your servants, the prophets, and for the saints, and for those in whom is the fear of your name, small and great, and the time of destruction for those who made the earth unclean.
And the house of God which is in heaven was open; and the ark of his agreement was seen in his house, and there were flames and voices and thunders and an earth-shock and a rain of ice.
And a great sign was seen in heaven: a A woman clothed with the sun, and with the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars.
And she was with child; and she gave a cry, in the pains of childbirth.
And there was seen another sign in heaven; a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads seven crowns.
And his tail was pulling a third part of the stars of heaven down to the earth, and the dragon took his place before the woman who was about to give birth, so that when the birth had taken place he might put an end to her child.
And she gave birth to a son, a male child, who was to have rule over all the nations with a rod of iron: and her child was taken up to God and to his high seat.
And the woman went in flight to the waste land, where she has a place made ready by God, so that there they may give her food a thousand, two hundred and sixty days.
And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels going out to the fight with the dragon; and the dragon and his angels made war,
And they were overcome, and there was no more place for them in heaven.
And the great dragon was forced down, the old snake, who is named the Evil One and Satan, by whom all the earth is turned from the right way; he was forced down to the earth, and his angels were forced down with him.
And a great voice in heaven came to my ears, saying, Now is come the salvation, and the power, and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of his Christ: because he who says evil against our brothers before our God day and night is forced down.
And they overcame him through the blood of the Lamb and the word of their witness; and loving not their lives they freely gave themselves up to death.
Be glad then, O heavens, and you who are in them. But there is trouble for the earth and the sea: because the Evil One has come down to you, being very angry, having the knowledge that he has but a short time.
And when the dragon saw that he was forced down to the earth, he made cruel attacks on the woman who gave birth to the male child.
And there were given to the woman two wings of a great eagle, so that she might go in flight into the waste land, to her place, where she is given food for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the snake.
And the snake sent out of his mouth after the woman a river of water, so that she might be taken away by the stream.
And the earth gave help to the woman, and with open mouth took up the river which the dragon sent out of his mouth.
And the dragon was angry with the woman and went away to make war on the rest of her seed, who keep the orders of God, and the witness of Jesus:
And he took his place on the sand of the sea. And I saw a beast coming up out of the sea, having ten horns and seven heads, and on his horns ten crowns, and on his heads unholy names.
And the beast which I saw was like a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him his power and his seat and great authority.
And I saw one of his heads as if it had been given a death-wound; and his death-wound was made well: and all the earth was wondering at the beast.
And they gave worship to the dragon, because he gave authority to the beast; and worshipping the beast, they said, Who is like the beast? and who is able to go to war with him?
And there was given to him a mouth to say words of pride against God; and there was given to him authority to go on for forty-two months.
And his mouth was open to say evil against God, and against his name and his Tent, even against those who are in heaven.
And it was given to him to make war on the saints and to overcome them: and there was given to him authority over every tribe and people and language and nation.
And all who are on the earth will give him worship, everyone whose name has not been from the first in the book of life of the Lamb who was put to death.
If any man has ears, let him give ear.
If any man sends others into prison, into prison he will go: if any man puts to death with the sword, with the sword will he be put to death. Here is the quiet strength and the faith of the saints.
And I saw another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and his voice was like that of a dragon.
And he makes use of all the authority of the first beast before his eyes. And he makes the earth and those who are in it give worship to the first beast, whose death-wound was made well.
And he does great signs, even making fire come down from heaven on the earth before the eyes of men.
And those who are on the earth are turned from the true way by him through the signs which he was given power to do before the beast; giving orders to those who are on the earth to make an image to the beast, who was wounded by the sword, and came to life.
And he had power to give breath to the image of the beast, so that words might come from the image of the beast, and that he might have all those who did not give worship to the image of the beast put to death.
And he gives to all, small and great, the poor and those who have wealth, the free and those who are not free, a mark on their right hand or on their brows;
So that no man might be able to do trade but he who has the mark, even the name of the beast or the number of his name.
Here is wisdom. He who has knowledge let him get the number of the beast; because it is the number of a man: and his number is Six hundred and sixty-six.
And I saw the Lamb on the mountain of Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, marked on their brows with his name and the name of his Father.
And a voice from heaven came to my ears, like the sound of great waters, and the sound of loud thunder: and the voice which came to me was like the sound of players, playing on instruments of music.
And they made as it seemed a new song before the high seat, and before the four beasts and the rulers: and no man might have knowledge of the song but the hundred and forty-four thousand, even those from the earth whom God has made his for a price.
These are they who have not made themselves unclean with women; for they are virgins. These are they who go after the Lamb wherever he goes. These were taken from among men to be the first fruits to God and to the Lamb.
And in their mouth there was no false word, for they are untouched by evil.
And I saw another angel in flight between heaven and earth, having eternal good news to give to those who are on the earth, and to every nation and tribe and language and people,
Saying with a loud voice, Have fear of God and give him glory; because the hour of his judging is come; and give worship to him who made heaven and earth and the sea and the fountains of water.
And a second angel came after, saying, Destruction has come to Babylon the great, which gave to all the nations the wine of the wrath of her evil ways.
And a third angel came after them, saying with a loud voice, If any man gives worship to the beast and his image, and has his mark on his brow or on his hand,
To him will be given of the wine of God's wrath which is ready unmixed in the cup of his wrath and he will have cruel pain, burning with fire before the holy angels and before the Lamb:
And the smoke of their pain goes up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day and night, who give worship to the beast and his image, and have on them the mark of his name.
Here is the quiet strength of the saints, who keep the orders of God, and the faith of Jesus.
And a voice from heaven came to my ears, saying, Put in writing, There is a blessing on the dead who from now on come to their end in the Lord: yes, says the Spirit, that they may have rest from their troubles; for their works go with them.
And I saw a white cloud, and on the cloud I saw one seated, like a son of man, having on his head a crown of gold, and in his hand a sharp curved blade.
And another angel came out from the house of God, crying with a loud voice to him who was seated on the cloud, Put in your blade, and let the grain be cut: because the hour for cutting it is come; for the grain of the earth is over-ready.
And he who was seated on the cloud sent in his blade on the earth; and the grain of the earth was cut.
And another angel came out from the house of God which is in heaven, having a sharp curved blade.
And another angel came out from the altar, who has power over fire; and he gave a loud cry to him who had the sharp curved blade, saying, Put in your sharp blade, and let the grapes of the vine of the earth be cut; for her grapes are fully ready.
And the angel sent his blade into the earth, and the vine of the earth was cut, and he put it into the great wine-crusher of the wrath of God.
And the grapes were crushed under foot outside the town, and blood came out from them, even to the head-bands of the horses, two hundred miles.
And I saw another sign in heaven, great and strange; seven angels having the seven last punishments, for in them the wrath of God is complete.
And I saw a sea which seemed like glass mixed with fire; and those who had overcome the beast and his image and the number of his name, were in their places by the sea of glass, with God's instruments of music in their hands.
And they give the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and full of wonder are your works, O Lord God, Ruler of all; true and full of righteousness are your ways, eternal King.
What man is there who will not have fear before you, O Lord, and give glory to your name? because you only are holy; for all the nations will come and give worship before you; for your righteousness has been made clear.
And after these things I saw, and the house of the Tent of witness in heaven was open:
And the seven angels who had the seven punishments came out from the house of God, clothed with linen, clean and bright and with bands of gold about their breasts.
And one of the four beasts gave to the seven angels seven gold vessels full of the wrath of God, who is living for ever and ever.
And the house of God was full of smoke from the glory of God, and from his power, and no one was able to go into the house of God, till the seven punishments of the seven angels were ended.
And a great voice out of the house of God came to my ears, saying to the seven angels, Go, and let that which is in the seven vessels of the wrath of God come down on the earth.
And the first went, and let what was in his vessel come down on the earth; and it became an evil poisoning wound on the men who had the mark of the beast, and who gave worship to his image.
And the second let what was in his vessel come out into the sea; and it became blood as of a dead man; and every living thing in the sea came to an end.
And the third let what was in his vessel come out into the rivers and the fountains of water; and they became blood.
And the voice of the angel of the waters came to my ears, saying, True and upright is your judging, O Holy One, who is and was from all time:
For they made the blood of saints and prophets come out like a stream, and blood have you given them for drink; which is their right reward.
And a voice came from the altar, saying, Even so, O Lord God, Ruler of all, true and full of righteousness is your judging.
And the fourth let what was in his vessel come out on the sun; and power was given to it that men might be burned with fire.
And men were burned with great heat: and they said evil things against the name of the God who has authority over these punishments; and they were not turned from their evil ways to give him glory.
And the fifth let what was in his vessel come out on the high seat of the beast; and his kingdom was made dark; and they were biting their tongues for pain.
And they said evil things against the God of heaven because of their pain and their wounds; and they were not turned from their evil works.
And the sixth let what was in his vessel come out on the great river Euphrates; and it became dry, so that the way might be made ready for the kings from the east.
And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits, like frogs.
For they are evil spirits, working signs; who go out even to the kings of all the earth, to get them together to the war of the great day of God, the Ruler of all.
(See, I come as a thief. Happy is he who is watching and keeps his robes, so that he may not go unclothed, and his shame be seen.)
And they got them together into the place which is named in Hebrew Armageddon.
And the seventh let what was in his vessel come out on the air; and there came out a great voice from the house of God, from the high seat, saying, It is done.
And there were flames and voices and thunders; and there was a great earth-shock so that never, from the time when men were on the earth, had there been so great an earth-shock, so full of power.
And the great town was cut into three parts, and the towns of the nations came to destruction: and Babylon the great came into mind before God, to be given the cup of the wine of his wrath.
And every island went in flight, and the mountains were seen no longer.
And great drops of ice, every one about the weight of a talent, came down out of heaven on men: and men said evil things against God because of the punishment of the ice-drops; for it is very great.
And one of the seven angels who had the seven vessels came and said to me, Come here, so that you may see the judging of the evil woman who is seated on the great waters;
With whom the kings of the earth made themselves unclean, and those who are on the earth were full of the wine of her evil desires.
And he took me away in the Spirit into a waste land: and I saw a woman seated on a bright red beast, full of evil names, having seven heads and ten horns,
And the woman was clothed in purple and bright red, with ornaments of gold and stones of great price and jewels; and in her hand was a gold cup full of evil things and her unclean desires;
And on her brow was a name, SECRET, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF THE EVIL WOMEN AND OF THE UNCLEAN THINGS OF THE EARTH.
And I saw the woman overcome as with the wine of the blood of the saints, and the blood of those put to death because of Jesus. And when I saw her, I was overcome with a great wonder.
And the angel said to me, Why were you surprised? I will make clear to you the secret of the woman, and of the beast on which she is seated, which has the seven heads and the ten horns.
The beast which you saw was, and is not; and is about to come up out of the great deep, and to go into destruction. And those who are on the earth, whose names have not been put in the book of life from the first, will be full of wonder when they see the beast, that he was, and is not, and still will be.
Here is the mind which has wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman is seated:
And they are seven kings; the five have come to an end, the one is, the other has not come; and when he comes, he will have to go on for a little time.
And the beast which was, and is not, is himself the eighth, and is of the seven; and he goes into destruction.
And the ten horns which you saw are ten kings, which still have been given no kingdom; but they are given authority as kings, with the beast, for one hour.
These have one mind, and they give their power and authority to the beast.
These will make war against the Lamb, and the Lamb will overcome them, because he is the Lord of lords and King of kings; and those who are with him are named, marked out, and true.
And he said to me, The waters which you saw, where the evil woman is seated, are peoples, and armies, and nations and languages.
And the ten horns which you saw, and the beast, these will be turned against the evil woman, and will make her waste and uncovered, and will take her flesh for food, and will have her burned with fire.
Because God has put it in their hearts to do his purpose, and to be of one mind, giving their kingdom to the beast, till the words of God have effect and are complete.
And the woman whom you saw is the great town, which is ruling over the kings of the earth.
After these things I saw another angel coming down out of heaven, having great authority; and the earth was bright with his glory.
And he gave a loud cry, saying, Babylon the great has come down from her high place, she has come to destruction and has become a place of evil spirits, and of every unclean spirit, and a hole for every unclean and hated bird.
For through the wine of the wrath of her evil desires all the nations have come to destruction; and the kings of the earth made themselves unclean with her, and the traders of the earth had their wealth increased by the power of her evil ways.
And another voice from heaven came to my ears, saying, Come out of her, my people, so that you may have no part in her sins and in her punishments.
For her sins have gone up even to heaven, and God has taken note of her evil-doing.
Give to her as she gave, even an increased reward for her works; in the cup which was mixed by her, let there be mixed as much again for herself.
As she gave glory to herself, and became more evil in her ways, in the same measure give her pain and weeping: for she says in her heart, I am seated here a queen, and am no widow, and will in no way see sorrow.
For this reason in one day will her troubles come, death and sorrow and need of food; and she will be completely burned with fire; for strong is the Lord God who is her judge.
And the kings of the earth, who made themselves unclean with her, and in her company gave themselves up to evil, will be weeping and crying over her, when they see the smoke of her burning,
Watching from far away, for fear of her punishment, saying, Sorrow, sorrow for Babylon, the great town, the strong town! for in one hour you have been judged.
And the traders of the earth are weeping and crying over her, because no man has any more desire for their goods,
Gold, and silver, and stones of great price, and jewels, and delicate linen, and robes of purple and silk and red; and perfumed wood, and every vessel of ivory, and every vessel made of fair wood, and of brass, and iron, and stone;
And sweet-smelling plants, and perfumes, and wine, and oil, and well crushed grain, and cattle and sheep; and horses and carriages and servants; and souls of men.
And the fruit of your soul's desire has gone from you, and all things delicate and shining have come to an end and will never again be seen.
The traders in these things, by which their wealth was increased, will be watching far off for fear of her punishment, weeping and crying;
Saying, Sorrow, sorrow for the great town, she who was clothed in delicate linen, and purple, and red; with ornaments of gold and stones of great price and jewels!
For in one hour such great wealth has come to nothing. And every shipmaster, and all who are sailing on the sea, and sailors and all who get their living by the sea, were watching from far away,
And crying out when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What town is like the great town?
And they put dust on their heads, and were sad, weeping and crying, and saying, Sorrow, sorrow for the great town, in which was increased the wealth of all who had their ships on the sea because of her great stores! for in one hour she is made waste.
Be glad over her, heaven, and you saints, and Apostles, and prophets; because she has been judged by God on your account.
And a strong angel took up a stone like the great stone with which grain is crushed, and sent it into the sea, saying, So, with a great fall, will Babylon, the great town, come to destruction, and will not be seen any more at all.
And the voice of players and makers of music will never again be sounding in you: and no worker, expert in art, will ever again be living in you; and there will be no sound of the crushing of grain any more at all in you;
And never again will the shining of lights be seen in you; and the voice of the newly-married man and the bride will never again be sounding in you: for your traders were the lords of the earth, and by your evil powers were all the nations turned out of the right way.
And in her was seen the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all who have been put to death on the earth.
After these things there came to my ears a sound like the voice of a great band of people in heaven, saying, Praise to the Lord; salvation and glory and power be to our God:
For true and upright are his decisions; for by him has the evil woman been judged, who made the earth unclean with the sins of her body; and he has given her punishment for the blood of his servants.
And again they said, Praise to the Lord. And her smoke went up for ever and ever.
And the four and twenty rulers and the four beasts went down on their faces and gave worship to God who was seated on the high seat, saying, Even so, praise to the Lord.
And a voice came from the high seat, saying, Give praise to our God, all you his servants, small and great, in whom is the fear of him.
And there came to my ears the voice of a great army, like the sound of waters, and the sound of loud thunders, saying, Praise to the Lord: for the Lord our God, Ruler of all, is King.
Let us be glad with delight, and let us give glory to him: because the time is come for the Lamb to be married, and his wife has made herself ready.
And to her it was given to be clothed in delicate linen, clean and shining: for the clean linen is the righteousness of the saints.
And he said to me, Put in the book, Happy are the guests at the bride-feast of the Lamb. And he said to me, These are the true words of God.
And I went on my face before his feet to give him worship. And he said to me, See you do it not: I am a brother-servant with you and with your brothers who keep the witness of Jesus: give worship to God: for the witness of Jesus is the spirit of the prophet's word.
And the heaven was open; and I saw a white horse, and he who was seated on it was named Certain and True; and he is judging and making war in righteousness.
And his eyes are a flame of fire, and crowns are on his head; and he has a name in writing, of which no man has knowledge but himself.
And he is clothed in a robe washed with blood: and his name is The Word of God.
And the armies which are in heaven went after him on white horses, clothed in delicate linen, white and clean.
And out of his mouth comes a sharp sword, with which he overcomes the nations: and he has rule over them with a rod of iron: and he is crushing with his feet the grapes of the strong wrath of God the Ruler of all.
And on his robe and on his leg is a name, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.
And I saw an angel taking his place in the sun; and he was crying with a loud voice, saying to all the birds in flight in the heavens, Come together to the great feast of God;
So that you may take for your food the flesh of kings, and of captains, and of strong men, and of horses and of those who are seated on them, and the flesh of all men, free and unfree, small and great.
And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, come together to make war against him who was seated on the horse and against his army.
And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet who did the signs before him, by which they were turned from the true way who had the mark of the beast, and who gave worship to his image: these two were put living into the sea of ever-burning fire.
And the rest were put to death with the sword of him who was on the horse, even the sword which came out of his mouth: and all the birds were made full with their flesh.
And I saw an angel coming down out of heaven, having the key of the great deep and a great chain in his hand.
And he took the dragon, the old snake, which is the Evil One and Satan, and put chains on him for a thousand years,
And put him into the great deep, and it was shut and locked over him, so that he might put the nations in error no longer, till the thousand years were ended: after this he will be let loose for a little time.
And I saw high seats, and they were seated on them, and the right of judging was given to them: and I saw the souls of those who were put to death for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and those who did not give worship to the beast, or to his image, and had not his mark on their brows or on their hands; and they were living and ruling with Christ a thousand years.
The rest of the dead did not come to life again till the thousand years were ended. This is the first coming back from the dead.
Happy and holy is he who has a part in this first coming: over these the second death has no authority, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and will be ruling with him a thousand years.
And when the thousand years are ended, Satan will be let loose out of his prison,
And will go out to put in error the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to get them together to the war, the number of whom is like the sands of the sea.
And they went up over the face of the earth, and made a circle about the tents of the saints, and the well loved town: and fire came down out of heaven for their destruction.
And the Evil One who put them in error was sent down into the sea of ever-burning fire, where the beast and the false prophet are, and their punishment will go on day and night for ever and ever.
And I saw a great white seat, and him who was seated on it, before whose face the earth and the heaven went in flight; and there was no place for them.
And I saw the dead, great and small, taking their places before the high seat; and the books were open, and another book was open, which is the book of life; and the dead were judged by the things which were in the books, even by their works.
And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and Hell gave up the dead which were in them; and they were judged every man by his works.
And death and Hell were put into the sea of fire. This is the second death, even the sea of fire.
And if anyone's name was not in the book of life, he went down into the sea of fire.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were gone; and there was no more sea.
And I saw the holy town, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, like a bride made beautiful for her husband.
And there came to my ears a great voice out of the high seat, saying, See, the Tent of God is with men, and he will make his living-place with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them, and be their God.
And he will put an end to all their weeping; and there will be no more death, or sorrow, or crying, or pain; for the first things have come to an end.
And he who is seated on the high seat said, See, I make all things new. And he said, Put it in the book; for these words are certain and true.
And he said to me, It is done. I am the First and the Last, the start and the end. I will freely give of the fountain of the water of life to him who is in need.
He who overcomes will have these things for his heritage; and I will be his God, and he will be my son.
But those who are full of fear and without faith, the unclean and takers of life, those who do the sins of the flesh, and those who make use of evil powers or who give worship to images, and all those who are false, will have their part in the sea of ever-burning fire which is the second death.
And one of the seven angels who had the seven vessels in which were the seven last punishments, came and said to me, Come here, and see the bride, the Lamb's wife.
And he took me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain, and let me see the holy town Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God,
Having the glory of God: and her light was like a stone of great price, a jasper stone, clear as glass:
She had a wall great and high, with twelve doors, and at the doors twelve angels; and names on them, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel.
And on the east were three doors; and on the north three doors; and on the south three doors; and on the west three doors.
And the wall of the town had twelve bases, and on them the twelve names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.
And he who was talking with me had a gold measuring-rod to take the measure of the town, and of its doors, and its wall.
And the town is square, as wide as it is long; and he took the measure of the town with the rod, one thousand and five hundred miles: it is equally long and wide and high.
And he took the measure of its wall, one hundred and forty-four cubits, after the measure of a man, that is, of an angel.
And the building of its wall was of jasper, and the town was clear gold, clear as glass.
The bases of the wall of the town had ornaments of all sorts of beautiful stones. The first base was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, chalcedony; the fourth, emerald;
The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprase; the eleventh, jacinth; the twelfth, amethyst.
And the twelve doors were twelve pearls; every door was made of one pearl; and the street of the town was clear gold, as clear as glass.
And I saw no Temple there; because the Lord God, the Ruler of all, and the Lamb are its Temple.
And the town has no need of the sun, or of the moon, to give it light: for the glory of God did make it light, and the light of it is the Lamb.
And the nations will go in its light: and the kings of the earth will take their glory into it.
And the doors of it will never be shut by day (for there is no night there):
And the glory and honour of the nations will come into it:
And nothing unclean may come into it, or anyone whose works are cursed or false; but only those whose names are in the Lamb's book of life.
And I saw a river of water of life, clear as glass, coming out of the high seat of God and of the Lamb,
In the middle of its street. And on this side of the river and on that was the tree of life, having twelve sorts of fruits, giving its fruit every month; and the leaves of the tree give life to the nations.
And there will be no more curse: and the high seat of God and of the Lamb will be there; and his servants will be worshipping him;
And they will see his face; and his name will be on their brows.
And there will be no more night; and they have no need of a light or of the shining of the sun; for the Lord God will give them light: and they will be ruling for ever and ever.
And he said to me, These words are certain and true: and the Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, sent his angel to make clear to his servants the things which are now to come about.
See, I come quickly. A blessing on him who keeps the words of this book of the prophet.
And I, John, am he who saw these things and to whose ears they came. And when I had seen and given ear, I went down on my face to give worship at the feet of the angel who made these things clear to me.
And he said to me, See you do it not; I am a brother-servant with you and with your brothers the prophets, and with those who keep the words of this book: give worship to God.
And he said to me, Let not the words of this prophet's book be kept secret, because the time is near.
Let the evil man go on in his evil: and let the unclean be still unclean: and let the upright go on in his righteousness: and let the holy be holy still.
See, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give to every man the outcome of his works.
I am the First and the Last, the start and the end.
A blessing on those whose robes are washed, so that they may have a right to the tree of life, and may go in by the doors into the town.
Outside are the dogs, and those who make use of evil powers, those who make themselves unclean, and the takers of life, and those who give worship to images, and everyone whose delight is in what is false.
I, Jesus, have sent my angel to give witness to you of these things in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, the bright and morning star.
And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him who gives ear, say, Come. And let him who is in need come; and let everyone desiring it take of the water of life freely.
For I say to every man to whose ears have come the words of this prophet's book, If any man makes an addition to them, God will put on him the punishments which are in this book:
And if any man takes away from the words of this book, God will take away from him his part in the tree of life and the holy town, even the things which are in this book.
He who gives witness to these things says, Truly, I come quickly. Even so come, Lord Jesus.
The grace of the Lord Jesus be with the saints. So be it.
